1 

      J. R. R. Tolkien: the master      
     storyteller who shaped the most 
    compelling fantasy of all time... 
                                       
 THE HOBBIT.                           
                                       
 The Lord of the Rings.                 
                                       
 THE FELLOWSHIP OF                      
 THE RING                               
 THE TWO TOWERS.                        
 THE RETURN OF                          
 THE KING.                              

 

                     THE SONG OF TUOR.                  
                                                       
  "Then  the  magic  drifted  from  me  and  that music 
  loosed its bands -                                    
  Far, far-off, conches calling - lo! I  stood in  the sweet 
  lands,                                                
  And  the  meadows  were  about  me  where  the  weep- 
  ing willows grew,                                     
 Where  the  long  grass  stirred  beside  me,  and  my 
  feet were drenched with dew.                          
 Only the reeds were rustling,  but a  mist lay  on the 
  streams.                                             
  Like a  sea-roke drawn  far inland,  like a  shred of 
  salt sea-dreams.                                      
 "Twas   in   the   Land  of   Willows  that   I  heard 
  th'unfathomed breath                                  
 Of  the  Horns  of  Ylmir calling - and  shall  hear  them 
  till my death."                                       

 

  By J. R. R. Tolkien.                                              
  Published by Ballantine Books:                                   
                                                                  
  THE HOBB1T.                                                       
                                                                  
  THE LORD OF THE RINGS.                                            
                    The Fellowship of the Ring.                     
     The Two Towers.                                               
     The Return of the King.                                       
                                                                  
  THE SILMARILLION.                                             
                                                                  
  UNFINISHED TALES.                                                 
                                                                  
  THE TOLKIEN READER.                                              
                                                                  
  SIR GAWAIN & THE GREEN KNIGHT.                                   
                                                                  
  SMITH OF WOOTTON MAJOR & FARMER GILES OF HAM.                 
                                                                  
  THE HISTORIES OF MIDDLE-EARTH.                                   
  The Book of Lost Tales 1.                                        
  The Book of Lost Tales 2.                                        
  The Lays of Belariand.                                           
  The Shaping of Middle-earth.                                     
                                                                  
  By Humphrey carpenter:                                            
  TOLKIEN: The Authorized Biography.                               
                                                                  
  By Paul H. Kocher:                                               
  MASTER OF MIDDLE-EARTH:                                          
  The Fiction of J. R. R. Tolkien.                                 
                                                                  
  By Robert Foster:                                                
  THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO MIDDLE-EARTH:                              
  From The Hobbit to The Silmarillion.                             


2 

                                                                  
           Books  published  by  The  Ballantine  Publishing Group 
           are available at quantity discounts on  bulk purchases 
           for  premium,  educational, fund-raising,  and special 
           sales use. For details, please call 1-800-733-3000. 

 

                THE                  
             SHAPING OF              
              MIDDLE-                
               EARTH.                
                                    
    The Quenta, The Ambarkanta,      
           and The Annals.           
                                    
         J. R. R. Tolkien.          
                                    
                                 
          A Del Rey(R) Book.           
    BALLANTINE BOOKS þ NEW YORK.     

 

  Sale of this book without a front cover  may be  unauthorized. If 
  this book is coverless, it may have been reported to the publish- 
  er as "unsold or destroyed" and neither the  author nor  the pub- 
  lisher may have received payment for it.                          
                                                                   
  A Del Rey Book.                                                   
  Published by Ballantine Books.                                    
                                                                   
  Copyright (C) 1986 by Frank Richard Williamson and Christopher      
  Reuel Tolkien as Executors of the Estate of J. R. R. Tolkien. 
                                                                   
  All rights  reserved under  International and  Pan-American Copy- 
  right Conventions. Published in the  United States  by Ballantine 
  Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.                
                                                                   
  Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 86-10338.                
                                                                   
  ISBN 0-345-40043-7.                                               
                                                                   
  First published by Houghton Mifflin Company.                      
                                                                   
  Reprinted by special arrangement with Houghton Mifflin            
  Company.                                                          
                                                                   
  Manufactured in the  United States  of America.                   
                                                                   
  First Ballantine  Books Edition:  December 1995.                  
                                                                   
  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1.                                             

 

                           CONTENTS.                                  
                                                                     
  Preface.                                                       Vll. 
                                                                     
     I.PROSE FRAGMENTS FOLLOWING THE 1.                               
                                                                     
         LOST TALES.                                                  
                                                                     
    II.THE EARLIEST 'SILMARILLION'.                               11. 
         Commentary.                                             47. 
                                                                     
   III.THE QUENTA.                                                 92. 
         Commentary.                                            199. 
         Appendix  1:  AElfwine's  translation of  the Quenta         
   into  Old   English;  Old   English  equivalents   of  El-         
   vish names.                                                  251. 
         Appendix 2: The Horns of Ylmir.                        262. 
                                                                     
   IV.THE FIRST 'SILMARILLION' MAP.                             269. 


3 

                                                                     
    V.THE AMBARKANTA.                                           288. 
                Commentary.                                     296. 
                                                                     
                              VI.THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF VALINOR.310. 
   Commentary.                                                    325. 
                                                                     
               Appendix: AElfwine's translations of the Annals        
               of Valinor into Old English.                     334. 
                                                                     
                                      V.                              

 

                    VII.THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF BELERIAND.351. 
        Commentary.                                        375. 
        Second version of the earliest Annals.             393. 
        Commentary.                                        400. 
        Appendix: AElfwine's translation of the Annals of      
         Beleriand into Old English.                       406. 
                                                              
 Index.                                                    412. 

 

 

                                     
 This book brings  the 'History  of Middle-earth'  to some  time in 
 the  1930s: the  cosmographical work  Ambarkanta and  the earliest 
 Annals of Valinor and Annals  of Beleriand,  while later  than the 
 Quenta Noldorinwa - the 'Silmarillion'  version that  was written, 
 as I believe, in 1930 - cannot themselves be more precisely dated. 
   This  is  the  stage  at which  my father  had arrived  when The 
 Hobbit  was  written.  Comparison  of  the  Quenta  with  the pub- 
 lished Silmarillion will show that the essential character  of the 
 work  was  now  fully  in  being; in  the shape  and fall  of sen- 
 tences, even of whole passages,  the one  is constantly  echoed in 
 the other;  and yet  the published  Silmarillion is  between three 
 and four times as long.                                           
   After the hasty  'Sketch of  the Mythology'  (chapter II in this 
 book), the Quenta Noldorinwa was  in fact  the only  complete ver- 
 sion of 'The Silmarillion' that my father  ever made.  Towards the 
 end  of  1937  he  interrupted  work  on  a  new  version,  Quenta 
 Silmarillion,  which  extended  to part way  through the  story of 
 Turin  Turambar,  and began The Lord  of the  Rings (see  The Lays 
 of Beleriand pp. 364 -  7). When  after many  years he returned to 
 the First Age, the vast extension of the world  that had  now come 
 into  being  meant that  the Quenta  Silmarillion, which  had been 
 stopped in full flight, could not be taken up  from where  it fell; 
 and  though  he  undertook exceedingly  complex revisions  and en- 
 largements of  the earlier  parts during  the following  years, he 
 never achieved again  a complete  and coherent  structure. Especial- 
 ly in its concluding chapters  the Quenta  Noldorinwa is  thus one 
 of the primary elements in the study of the work as a whole.      

 

                
                                                                            
   In  the  Annals  of  Valinor  and  the  Annals of  Beleriand am           
 seen  the  beginnings  of the  chronological structure  which was           
 to  become  a  central  preoccupation.  The Annals  would develop           
 into a separate 'tradition', parallel to and overlapping but dis-           
 tinct from 'The Silmarillion' proper, and (after  intervening ver-           
 sions)  emerging  in the  years following  the completion  of The           
 Lord of the Rings in  two chief  works of  the Matter  of Middle-           
 earth,  the  Annals  of  Aman  and the  Grey Annals  of Beleriand           
 (see  pp.  310,  351). With  the Quenta  and with  these earliest           
 versions  of the  Annals I  give the  brief texts  in Anglo-Saxon           
 feigned  to have  been made  by AElfwine  (Eriol) from  the works           
 that he studied in Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle.                            
   The  commentaries  are largely  concerned to  relate geography,           
 names,  events, relationships  and motives  to what  preceded and           
 what followed; inevitably this entails a great deal  of reference           
 back  to the  previous books,  and the  text of  the commentaries           


4 

 is hardly enticing  (though being  in smaller  print they  can be           
 readily distinguished from the original works).  My object  is to           
 try  to  show,  and not  merely impressionistically,  how Middle-           
 earth and its history was built up gradually and  delicately, and           
 how a long  series of  small shifts  or combinations  would often           
 lead  to  the  emergence of  new and  unforeseen structures  - as           
 far example in the story of Gwindor of Nargothrond (p. 217).                
   The  arrangement of  the texts  of the  'Sketch of  the Mythol-           
 ogy'  and  the  Quenta, split  into numbered  sections comparable           
 from one text to the other, is  explained on  p. 11.  The earlier           
 volumes in the  series are  referred to  as I  (The Book  of Lost           
 Tales Part I), II (The Book of Lost Tales Part II), and  III (The           
 Lays of Beleriand).*                                                        
   The  maps  and  diagrams  in  the  book  are   reproduced  with           
 the permission of the Bodleian Library, Oxford,  and I  thank the           
 staff of the Department  of Western  Manuscripts at  the Bodleian           
 for their assistance.                                                       
   The  fifth volume  will contain  my father's  unfinished 'time-           
 travel' story, The Lost  Road, together  with the  earliest forms           
 of  the  legend  of Numenor,  which were  closely related  to it;           
 the  Lhammas  or  Account  of Tongues,  Etymologies; and  all the           
 writings concerned with the  First Age  up to  the time  when The           
 Lord of the Rings was begun.                                                
                                                                            
 (* Note that all page numbers refer to the hardcover Houghton Mifflin editions.) 

 

 

                                  I.                                 
                                                                    
                           PROSE FRAGMENTS                           
                      FOLLOWING THE LOST TALES.                    
                                                                    
 Before  giving  the  'Sketch  of the  Mythology', the  earliest form 
 of the prose 'Silmarillion', there are some  brief prose  texts that 
 can be conveniently collected here.                                 
                                                                    
                                 (i).                                
                                                                    
 Among  loose  papers  there  is  an  early  piece,  soon  abandoned, 
 entitled Turlin and the  Exiles of  Gondolin. It  will be  seen that 
 it  relates closely  to the  beginning of  the tale  of The  Fall of 
 Gondolin (II.  149)  but  at  the  same time  contains much  that is 
 new. That it was the beginning  of a  later version  of the  tale is 
 clear  at  once  from  the  name  Mithrim,  for  this  only replaced 
 Asgon  by  emendation  in  the final  text of  The Fall  of Gondolin 
 (II. 202). This brief text reads as follows. At  the first  three oc- 
 currences of the name Turlin in the  narrative (but  not in  the ti- 
 tle)  it  was  emended  to Turgon;  at the  fourth and  fifth Turgon 
 was so written from the first. I give Turgon throughout.            
                                                                    
   'Then'   said   Ilfiniol   son   of   Bronweg   'know   that  Ulmo 
 Lord  of  Waters  forgot  never  the  sorrows  of  the   Elfin  kin- 
 dreds  beneath  the  power  of  Melko,  but   he  might   do  little 
 because   of  the   anger  of   the  other   Gods  who   shut  their 
 hearts  against  the  race  of  the  Gnomes,  and  dwelt  behind the 
 veiled  hills  of  Valinor  heedless  of  the  Outer World,  so deep 
 was  their  ruth  and  regret  for  the  death  of  the  Two  Trees. 
 Nor  did  any  save  Ulmo  only  dread  the  power  of   Melko  that 
 wrought  ruin  and  sorrow  over  all  the   Earth;  but   Ulmo  de- 
 sired  that  Valinor  should  gather  all  its  might to  quench his 
 evil  ere it  be  too  late,  and  him  seemed  that  both  purposes 
                                                                    
                                                                   

 

 might   perchance   be   achieved   if  messengers   from  the 
 Gnomes  should win  to Valinor  and plead  for pardon  and for 
 pity upon the Earth; for the  love of  Palurien and  Orome her 
 son  for those  wide realms  did but  slumber still.  Yet hard 
 and evil was the  road from  the Outer  Earth to  Valinor, and 


5 

 the  Gods  themselves  had  meshed  the  ways  with  magic and 
 veiled the encircling  hills. Thus  did Ulmo  seek unceasingly 
 to  stir  the  Gnomes  to  send  messengers unto  Valinor, but 
 Melko  was  cunning  and  very  deep  in wisdom,  and unsleep- 
 ing  was his  wariness in  all things  that touched  the Elfin 
 kindreds,  and their  messengers overcame  not the  perils and 
 temptations of that longest and  most evil  of all  roads, and 
 many that dared to set forth were lost for ever.              
   Now  tells  the  tale  how  Ulmo despaired  that any  of the 
 Elfin  race  should  surpass the  dangers of  the way,  and of 
 the deepest and the latest design that he then  fashioned, and 
 of those things which came of it.                             
   In  those  days  the greater  part  of  the kindreds  of Men 
 dwelt after the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears  in that  land of 
 the North  that has  many names,  but which  the Elves  of Kor 
 have  named  Hisilome  which  is  the  Twilit  Mist,  and  the 
 Gnomes,  who  of  the  Elf-kin  know  it  best,  Dor-Lomin the 
 Land  of  Shadows.  A  people  mighty  in numbers  were there, 
 dwelling  about  the  wide  pale waters  of Mithrim  the great 
 lake that lies  in those  regions, and  other folk  named them 
 Tunglin or folk of the  Harp, for  their joy  was in  the wild 
 music  and  minstrelsy of  the fells  and woodlands,  but they 
 knew not and  sang not  of the  sea. Now  this folk  came into 
 those places after the dread battle,  being too  late summoned 
 thither  from  afar,  and  they  bore  no  stain  of treachery 
 against  the  Elfin  kin;  but  indeed  many among  them clung 
 to  such  friendship  with  the  hidden  Gnomes  of  the moun- 
 tains and  Dark Elves  as might  be still  for the  sorrow and 
 mistrust born of those ruinous deeds in  the Vale  of Niniach. 
 Turgon was a man of  that folk,  son of  Peleg, son  of Indor, 
 son of  [Ear >]  Fengel who  was their  chief and  hearing the 
 summons had  marched out  of the  deeps of  the East  with all 
 his  folk. But  Turgon dwelt  not much  with his  kindred, and 

 

 loved  rather  solitude and  the friendship  of the  Elves whose 
 tongues  he  knew,  and  he  wandered   alone  about   the  long 
 shores  of  Mithrim,  now  hunting  in  its  woods,  now  making 
 sudden  music  in  the  rocks  upon  his  rugged  harp  of  wood 
 strung  with  the  sinews  of  bears.  But he  sang not  for the 
 ears  of  Men,  and  many  hearing  the   power  of   his  rough 
 songs  came  from  afar  to  hearken  to  his   harping;  [?but] 
 Turgon left his  singing and  departed to  lonely places  in the 
 mountains.                                                       
   Many  strange  things  he  learned  there,  broken  tidings of 
 far  off  things,  and longing  came upon  him for  deeper lore, 
 but as yet  his heart turned not  from the  long shores,  and the 
 pale  waters  of  Mithrim  in the  mists. Yet  was he  not fated 
 to dwell  for ever  in those  places, for  'tis said  that magic 
 and  destiny led  him on  a day  to a  cavernous opening  in the 
 rocks   down  which   a  hidden   river  flowed   from  Mithrim. 
 And  Turgon  entered that  cavern seeking  to learn  its secret, 
 but  having  entered  the  waters  of  Mithrim  drave  him  for- 
 ward  into  the  heart of  the rock  and he  might not  win back 
 into the  light. This  men have  said was  not without  the will 
 of   Ulmo,   at   whose   prompting  may   be  the   Gnomes  had 
 fashioned   that   deep   and   hidden   way.   Then   came  the 
 Gnomes  to  Turgon  and  guided  him  along  the  dark  passages 
 amid  the  mountains  until  he  came  out  once  more  into the 
 light.                                                           
                                                                 
   The text  ends here  (though manuscript  pages written  at the 
 same time continue on another subject, see (ii) below).          
   Turlin must have been a passing shift from Tuor (cf.  the form 
 Tur that appears in texts of The Fall of Gondolin, II. 148), and 
 Turgon likewise; in the Tale Turgon is of course the name of the 
 King of Gondolin. This  curious passing  transference of  a pri- 
 mary name in the  legends may  be compared  with the  brief sub- 
 stitution of Celegorm for Thingol  and Maglor  for Beren  in the 
 Lay of Leithian (III. 159).                                       


6 

   Particularly interesting is the account here of the origins of 
 Tuor's people: they came out of the  East to  the Battle  of Un- 
 numbered  Tears,  but  they came  too late.  This can  hardly be 

 

  wholly  unconnected  with  the  coming  of the  Easterlings before 
  the  battle  in  the later  story. The  genealogy of  Tuor (Turlin, 
  Turgon) is here 'son of  Peleg son  of Indor  son of  Fengel'. In 
  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  he  is  'son  of  Peleg  son   of  Indor' 
  (II. 160); in the fragment of the Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin he 
  is the son of  Fengel, and  in associated  notes Tuor  is himself 
  called Fengel (III.  145). His  people are  here the  Tunglin, the 
  folk  of  the Harp,  whereas in  The Fall  of Gondolin  (ibid.) he 
  belongs  to  'the house  of the  Swan of  the sons  of the  Men of 
  the North'.                                                        
    Also  noteworthy  is  the  opening  of  the  present  text where 
  Ulmo's  desires  and  devisings ate  described: his  unceasing at- 
  tempts  to  persuade  the  Gnomes to  send messengers  to Valinor, 
  his isolation from the  other Valar,  his wish  that the  power of 
  Valinor  should  go  against  Melko  in time.  There does  not ap- 
  pear  to  Le  any  other  mention of  Ulmo's attempting  to arouse 
  the  Gnomes  to  send  messages  to Valinor;  and though  his iso- 
  lation  in  his pity  for the  Gnomes in  the Great  Lands appears 
  strongly at the beginning  of the  tale of  The Hiding  of Valinor 
  g.  209),  there  Manwe  and  Varda  beside  Ulmo were  opposed to 
  the withdrawal of Valinor from the fate of 'the world'.            
    Lastly, 'the Vale of  Niniach' must  be the  site of  the Battle 
  of  Unnumbered  Tears;  cf.  'the  Vale  (Valley)  of  Weeping Wa- 
  ters'  in  the  outlines  for  Gilfanon's  Tale (I.230-40). Niniach 
  never  occurs  again  in  this  application,  though  the  way  by 
  which  Tuor  went  down  to  the  sea  came  to  be  called Cirith 
  Ninniach, the Rainbow Cleft.                                       
                                                                    
                                 (ii).                                 
                                                                    
  The  manuscript  Turlin  and  the  Exiles  of  Gondolin  continues 
  (the  paper  and  the  handwriting  are  identical,  and  all were 
  placed together) with a further text of  great interest,  since it 
  represents the first step towards  the later  story of  the coming 
  of the Noldor to  Middle-earth since  the outlines  for Gilfanon's 
  Tale g. 237 ff.). This was hastily pencilled and is in places dif- 
  ficult to make out.                                                

 

   
                                                               
  Then   Gelmir  king   of  the   Gnomes  marshalled   his  un- 
 happy folk and he said to  them: 'We  am come  at last  to the 
 Great Lands  and have  set our  feet upon  the Earth,  and not 
 even Elf-wisdom may yet  say what  shall come  of it;  but the 
 torment  and  the pain  and the  tears that  we have  borne in 
 the way hither shall be sung in song and told  in tale  by all 
 the  folk  of  the Elfin  race hereafter;  yea and  even among 
 other children of Ior shall some remember it.'                 
  Long  time  did  the  Gnome-folk   dwell  nigh   those  west- 
 ward shores in  the northern regions of  the Earth;  and their 
 anguish was  lessened. Some  were there that fared  far afield 
 and  gained  knowledge  of  the lands  about, and  they sought 
 ever  to  know  whither Melko  had fled,  or where  was hidden 
 the  gems  and  treasury  of  Valinor.  [Struck out:  Then did 
 Gelmir marshal his hosts and  three great  armies had  he, and 
 Golfin his son was captain of the  one, and  Delin his  son of 
 a second, [Oleg >] Luthien his  son of  the third,  but Gelmir 
 was lord and king.] Thereafter  did all  the folk  move onward 
 to  the  East  and  somewhat  South,  and  all  the  armies of 
 Golfin  and  of  Delin  moved  ahead  unhampered. Now  the ice 
 melted,  and  the  snow  [?thinned], and  the trees  grew deep 
 upon  the  hills, and  their hearts  knew comfort,  till their 
 harps  and elfin  pipes awoke  once more.  Then did  the rocks 
 ring  with  the  sweet  music  of  the  Elves,  and  countless 
 [?coming]  of  their  many  feet;  new  flowers  sprang behind 


7 

 those  armies  as they  trod, for  the earth  was glad  of the 
 coming  of  the  Gnomes,  nor had  the sun  or the  white moon 
 yet seen fairer things in those places than their moving field 
 of glinting spears  and their  goldwrought elfin  armoury. But 
 the  women  and  the   Gnome-maids  and   Gnome-children  sang 
 as  they  journeyed  after,  and  no such  clear song  of hope 
 have the  lands heard  since, yet  was it  sad and  boding be- 
 side that  singing that  was heard  upon [Kor  >] the  hill of 
 Tun while the Two Trees blossomed still.                       
  Of  all  those  scouts  and  scattered  hosts  that  went far 
 ahead  or  upon  either  side  of  the  marching  Gnomes  none 
 were more eager  or burnt  with greater  fire than  Feanor the 
 gem-smith  and  his  seven  sons;  but  nothing did  they dis- 

 

  cover  yet,  and  came the  Gnomes at  length unto  that magic 
  northern land of  which tales  often speak,  and by  reason of 
  its  dark  woods  and grey  mountains and  its deep  mists the 
  Gnomes  named  Dor Lomin  land  of   shadows.  There   lies  a 
  lake,  Mithrim  whose mighty  waters reflect  a pale  image of 
  the encircling hills.  Here did  the Gnomes  rest once  more a 
  great  while,  and  Gelmir  let build  dwellings for  the folk 
  about  the  shores  and  shoreland  woods,  but  there  too be 
  numbered  and  marshalled  all  his  hosts  both  of spearmen, 
  and  bowmen,  and  of  swordsmen,  for  no  lack  of  arms did 
  the  Gnomes  bring  out  of  Valinor  and  the   armouries  of 
  Makar  to  their  war with  Melko. And three great  armies had 
  Gelmir  under  his lordship,  and Golfin  his son  was captain 
  of one, and Delin his son  of another,  and Luthien  (not that 
  Luthien of the Roses who is of  another and  a later  tale) of 
  a  third;  and  Golfin's  might  was  in swordsmen,  and Delin 
  had  more  of  those who  bore the  long... elfin  spears, but 
  Luthien's  joy  was  in  the  number  and...  of his  bowmen - 
  and  the  bow  has ever  been the  weapon wherein  the Elf-kin 
  has  had  the  most  wondrous  skill. Now  the colours  of the 
  Gnomes  were  gold  and white  in those  ancient days  in mem- 
  ory  of  the  Two Trees,  but  Gelmir's  standard  bore upon a 
  silver field  a crown  of gold,  and each  captain had  a fair 
  banner; and the sign  of Golfin  in those  days was  upon gold 
  a silver sword, and of Delin  a green  beech leaf  upon silver 
  diapered  with  golden  flowers,  and  of  Luthien   a  golden 
  swallow  that winged  through an  azure field  as it  were the 
  sky  set  with  silver stars,  and the  sons of  Feanor wrought 
  that standard and those  banners, and  they shone  by sunlight 
  and  by  mist and  by moonlight  and by  starless dark  by the 
  light of the Gnome-wrought gems that sewed them [sic].         
    Now  it  happened  on  a  while that  Feanor got  him beyond 
  to the hills  that girt  Dor Lomin  in those  parts [northward 
  of  >]  beyond  Artanor  where  these  were  open  empty lands 
  and  treeless hills,  and he  had no  small company  and three 
  of  his  sons  were with  him. Thus  came they  on a  day nigh 
  evening to a hilltop, and afar off descried a red light leaping 
  in  a  vale  open on  that side  that looked  towards [?them]. 

 

          
                                                                   
 Then  Feanor  wondered  what  this  fire  might  be,  and   he  and 
 his folk marched in the still  night swiftly  thereto, so  that ere 
 dawn  they  looked  down  into  that  vale.  There  saw   they  an 
 armed  company  no  less  than  their  own,  and  they  sat around 
 a  mighty  fire  of  wood.  The  most  were  asleep, but  some few 
 stirred,  and  Feanor  stood  then  up  and  called  in  his clear 
 voice  so  that  the  dark  vale  rang:  'Who  be  ye; men  of the 
 Gnomes or other  what -  say swiftly  for 'tis  best for  [you to] 
 know the children of Feanor compass you around.'                   
  Then  a  great  clamour  broke  forth  in the  vale and  the folk 
 of  Feanor  knew  full  soon  that  here  were  no elfin  folk, by 
 reason  of  their  harsh  voices  and  unlovely  cries,  and  many 
 arrows  came  winging  in  the  dark   towards  that   voice,  but 
 Feanor  was  no  longer  there.  Swiftly  had  he  gone  and drawn 


8 

 the  most  of  his  folk   before  the   vale's  mouth   whence  a 
 stream issued forlh tree-hung                                      
                                                                   
  Here  the text  ends abruptly  and near  the top  of a  new page; 
 it is clear that no more was written.                              
  The  Noldorin  house  has  still  not  emerged,  but  we  have  a 
 king  Gelmir  of  the  Gnomes,  with   his  sons   Golfin,  Delin, 
 Luthien (the last  emended from Oleg), captains  of his  three ar- 
 mies. There is no  suggestion that  Feanor and  his sons  were as- 
 sociated  with  these  in  any  sort  of  close  kinship.  In  the 
 fragment  of  the  Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin (see III. 146-7) 
 there appears - for  the first  time -  Fingolfin, who  steps into 
 Finwe Noleme's place as  the father  of Turgon  and Isfin,  but is 
 not the son of  Finwe, rather  of Gelmir.  I have  suggested there 
 that this Gelmir, father of Golfin/Fingolfin, is to  be identified 
 with  Finwe,  father of  Fingolfin in  the alliterative  poems and 
 later;  and  it  may  be that  the name  Gelmir is  formally con- 
 nected  with  Fin-golma,  which  in  the  outlines-for  Gilfanon's 
 Tale  is  another  name  for  Finwe  Noleme  g.  238-9,   and  see 
 I.  263,  entry  Noleme).  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  Finwe 
 Noleme was not in  the earliest  legend the  father of  Feanor and 
 was  not  slain  by  Melko  in  Valinor,  but  came  to  the Great 
 Lands.  -  Of  the  other  sons  of  Gelmir  named in  the present 
 text, Delin and Luthien, there is no trace elsewhere.              
  It is certainly clear that Golfin here is the first appearaace of 

 

  Fingolfin,  and  by  the same  token that  this text  preceded the 
  abandoned  beginning  of  the  Lay  of  the  Fall of  Gondolin. On 
  the other hand, the obscure story of  the death  of Feanor  in the 
  earliest  outlines g.  238 -  9) has  disappeared, and  though the 
  present  text  breaks  off  too  soon for  certainty it  seems ex- 
  tremely probable that, had my  father continued  it a  little fur- 
  ther,  we should  have learned  of Feanor's  death in  battle with 
  the  Orcs  whom  he  and his  companions had  aroused in  the val- 
  ley  where  they  were  encamped It  may be,  too, that  we should 
  have  had  an  explanation  of  the puzzling  lines  of   the  Lay 
  (III. 146):                                                          
                                                                    
    'Twas the bent blades of the Glamhoth that drank                 
    Fiagolfin's life as he stood alone by Feanor.                    
                                                                    
  We are in any case here still  a long  way from  the story  of the 
  divided hosts and the treachery of Feanor.                         
    The  encampment  of  Mithrim  (Asgon)   is referred   to  already 
  in the early outlines, but in the later of these there  is mention 
  g. 239) of the first  devising of  weapons by  the Gnomes  at this 
  time, whereas in the present text  they are  said to  have brought 
  great  store  of  arms  'out  of  Valinor  and  the  armouries  of 
  Makar'. Here also appears  the earliest  form of  the idea  of the 
  flowers  springing  beneath  the  marching  feet  of  the  Gnomish 
  host.                                                              
    A  characteristic  heraldry  appears  in   the  armies   led  by 
  Gelmir's  sons,  all  in  gold and  silver, in  memory of  the Two 
  Trees  -  the  banners  made  (curiously  enough)  by the  sons of 
  Feanor.  In  the  'Sketch  of  the   Mythology'  the   banners  of 
  Fingolfin were in blue and silver, as they remained (p. 24).       
    The  name  Ior, which  occurs at  the beginning  of the  text in 
  the  expression  'among  other  children  of  Ior' (as  opposed to 
  'the Elfin race') and seems therefore to refer to Iluvatar,' occurs 
  elsewhere only in a quite different reference: it is given  in the 
  early  Gnomish  dictionary  as  the  equivalent  of  Qenya  Ivare, 
  'the famous "piper of the sea" '.                                  

 

                                (iii).                                
                                                                  
 Thirdly and lastly, an isolated slip of paper contains a  most cu- 
 rious trace of a stage in  development between  The Flight  of the 
 Noldoli  in  the  Lost Tales  and the  'Sketch of  the Mythology'. 
                                                                  


9 

   The  Trees  stand  dark.  The  Plain  is  full  of  trouble. The 
 Gnomes  gather  by  torchlight  in  Tun  or  Cor;  Feanor  laments 
 Buithwir  (Felegron)  [emended  to  (Feleor)]  his  father,  bids 
 Gnomes  depart  &  seek  Melko  and  their  treasures  -  he longs 
 for  the  Silmarils  -  Finweg  &  Fingolfin  speak  against  him. 
 The   Gnomes   shout   and  prepare   to  depart.   The  Solosimpi 
 refuse:   the   wise   words   of  Ethlon   (Dimlint).  Foamriders 
 [?beaches].  The  threats  of  Feanor  to march  to Cu  nan Eilch. 
 The  arch,  the  lamplit   quays;  they   seize  the   boats.  One 
 Gilfanon   sees   his   mighty   swanwinged    swan-feather   boat 
 with  md.oars  [?going]  &  he  k  his  sons run  to the  arch and 
 threaten  the  Gnomes.  The  fight  on   the  arch   &  Gilfanon's 
 [?curse]  ere  they  throw   him  into   the  waves.   The  Gnomes 
 reach Fangros k repent - burn the boats.                          
                                                                  
   Here  Bruithwir  (with  the additional  name Felegron  > Feleor) 
 is still the father of Feanor as in the Lost Tales;  but Fingolfin 
 and  Finweg  have  emerged, and  speak against  Feanor (it  is not 
 clear  whether  Finwegh  ere is Fingolfin's  father ( Finwe) or 
 Fingolfin's son (later Fingon): see  IIL 137  - 8,  146). Narrative 
 features  that were  never taken  up in  the later  development of 
 'The  Silmarillion'  here  make  their  only appearance.  What lay 
 behind 'the wise words of  Ethlon (Dimlint)'  and 'the  threats of 
 Feanor  to  march  to  Cu  nan  Eilch'  has  now  vanished without 
 trace.  The  name Fangros  appears once  elsewhere, in  the allit- 
 erative Children  of Hurin,  III. 31  line 631  (earlier Fangair), 
 where there is a reference to a song, or songs, being sung        
                                                                  
         of the fight at Fangros, and Feanor's sons'               
         oath unbreakable                                          
                                                                  
 (the fight and the oath  need not  be in  any way  connected). But 
 whatever  happened  at  Fangros  is  lost  beyond recall;  and no- 

 

  where later is there any suggestion that the burning of the ships 
  arose  from  repentance.  In the  Lost Tales  g. 168)  the Gnomes 
  'abandoned  their  stolen ships'  when they  made the  passage of 
  the Ice;  Sorontur reported  to Manwe  (I. 177)  that he  had seen 
  'a fleet of white ships that drifted empty in the gales, and some 
  were burning  with bright  fires', and  Manwe 'knew  thereby that 
  the Noldoli were gone for ever  and their  ships burned  or aban- 
  doned'.                                                           
    Lastly,  Gilfanon  appears  as  an  Elf  of Alqualonde,  one of 
  those hurled by the Gnomes into the  sea, though  it is  not said 
  that  he  was  drowned.   Gilfanon  of   Tavrobel  was   a  Gnome 
  g. 174-5); and it seems virtually certain that the  two Gilfanons 
  were not the same. In that case it is most probable that  the Elf 
  of Tavrobel had  ceased to  be so  named; though  he had  not, as 
  I think, ceased to exist (see pp. 325-326).                       

 

                                                              
                                                                 
                                 II.                                 
                                                                    
                     THE EARLIEST 'SILMARILLION'.                      
                  (The 'Sketch of the Mythology').                   
                                                                    
 I have earlier (III. 3) given an account of this text, but  I repeat 
 the  essentials of  it here.  On the  envelope containing  the man- 
 uscript my father wrote at some later time:                         
                                                                    
   Original    'Silmarillion'.    Form    orig    [inally]    composed 
   c.  1926-30   for  R.   W.  Reynolds   to  explain   background  of 
   'alliterative  version'  of Turin  & the  Dragon: then  in progress 
   (unfinished) (begun c. 1918).                                     
                                                                    
 The  'Sketch'  represents a  new starting-point  in the  history of 
 'The Silmarillion', for  while it  is a  quite brief  synopsis, the 
 further  written  development  of  the  prose  form  proceeded from 


10 

 it in a direct line. It is clear from details that need not  be re- 
 peated here that it was originally written in  1926 (after  the Lay 
 of  the  Children  of  Hurin had  been abandoned,  III. 3);  but it 
 was  afterwards  revised, in  places very  heavily, and  this makes 
 it a difficult text to present in a way that  is both  accurate and 
 readily  comprehensible.  The  method  I  have  adopted is  to give 
 the text exactly as it  was first  written (apart  from a  very few 
 slight alterations  of expression  in no  way affecting  the narra- 
 tive, which are adopted silently into the text), but to break it up 
 into short  sections, following  each with  notes giving  the later 
 changes made in that  section. I  must emphasize  that there  is no 
 manuscript warrant for the  19 divisions  so made:  it is  purely a 
 matter  of  convenience  of presentation.  This method  has certain 
 advantages:  the  later  changes  can be readily compared  with the 
 original  text  immediately  preceding;  and  since   the  following 
 version  of  'The Silmarillion',  the Quenta,  has been  treated in 
 the  same  way   and  divided   into corresponding   numbered  sec- 
 tions, passages of the one can be easily related to those  in the 
 other.                                                           
   The later  changes are  referenced by  numbers that  begin with 
 1  in  each section.  The commentary  follows at  the end  of the 
 complete text, and is related to the numbered sections.          
                                                                 
      Sketch of the mythology with especial reference to the      
                        'Children of Hurin'                       

 

                                 1. 
                                                                 
   After  the  despatch  of  the  Nine  Valar  for  the governance 
 of  the  world  Morgoth  (Demon  of  Dark)  rebels   against  the 
 overlordship  of  Manwe,  overthrows  the  lamps  set  up  to il- 
 lumine  the  world,  and  floods  the  isle  where the  Valar (or 
 Gods)  dwelt. He  fortifies a  palace of  dungeons in  the North. 
 The  Valar  remove  to  the  uttermost  West,  bordered   by  the 
 Outer  Seas  and  the final  Wall, and  eastward by  the towering 
 Mountains  of  Valinor  which  the  Gods  built. In  Valinor they 
 gather  all  light  and  beautiful things,  and build  their man- 
 sions,  gardens,  and  city,  but  Manwe  and  his  wife  Bridhil 
 have   halls   upon   the   highest   mountain   (Timbrenting  or 
 Tindbrenting  in  English,  Tengwethil  in   Gnomish,  Taniquetil 
 in  Elfin)  whence  they  can see  across the  world to  the dark 
 East.  Ifan  Belaurin(1) plants  the Two Trees  in the  middle of 
 the plain of Valinor  outside the  gates of  the city  of Valmar. 
 They  grow  under  her  songs,  and  one  has  dark  green leaves 
 with  shining  silver  beneath,  and  white  blossoms   like  the 
 cherry from  which a  dew of  silver light  falls; the  other has 
 golden-edged  leaves  of  young  green  like  the beech  and yel- 
 low  blossom  like  the  hanging   blossoms  of   laburnum  which 
 give  out  heat  and  blazing  light. Each  bee waxes  for seven' 
 hours  to  full  glory  and  then  wanes for  seven; twice  a day 
 therefore  comes  a  time  of  softer  light  when  each  tree is 
 faint and their light is mingled.                                
                                                                 
                                 *                                
  1. Yavanna Palurien added in the margin.                                   
  2. At both occurrences of seven in this sentence my father first wrote six, 
  but changed it in the act of writing the manuscript.                      
                                                                           
                                      2.                                    
                                                                           
 The  Outer  Lands  are  in  darkness.  The  growth  of things              
 was  checked  when  Morgoth  quenched  the  lamps.  There are              
 forests  of darkness,  of yew  and fir  and ivy.  There Orome              
 sometimes  hunts,  but  in  the  North  Morgoth  and  his de-              
 monic  broods (Balrogs)  and the  Orcs (Goblins,  also called              
 Glamhoth  or  people  of  hate) hold  sway. Bridhil  looks on              
 the darkness and is moved,  and taking  all the hoarded light              
 of Silpion (the white tree) she makes and strews the stars.                
 At the  making of  the stars  the children  of Earth  awake -              


11 

 the Eldar (or  Elves). They  are found  by Orome  dwelling by              
 the  star-lit  pool  (Cuivienen, water  of awakening)  in the              
 East. He rides home to Valinor filled  with their  beauty and              
 tells the Valar, who are reminded of their duty to the Earth,              
 since they.  came thither  knowing that  their office  was to              
 govern it for the two races  of Earth  who should  after come              
 each in appointed time.  There follows  an expedition  to the              
 fortress of the North (Angband, Iron-hell),  but this  is now              
 too  strong  for  them  to  destroy.  Morgoth  is nonetheless              
 taken  captive,  and  consigned  to the  halls of  Mandos who              
 dwelt in the North of Valinor.                                             
 The  Eldalie  (people of  the Elves)  are invited  to Valinor              
 for fear of the evil things of Morgoth that still wandered in              
 the dark. A great march is made  by the  Eldar from  the East              
 led  by  Orome  on  his  white horse.  The Eldar  are divided              
 into  three  hosts, one  under Ingwe  (Ing) after  called the              
 Quendi  (or Elves  proper, or  Light-elves), one  under Finwe              
 (Finn) after called the Noldoli  (Gnomes or  Deep-elves), one              
 under  Elwe  (Elu)  after  called  the Teleri  (Sea-elves, or              
 Solosimpi,  the  Shoreland  Pipers  or  Foamriders).  Many of              
 them  are  lost upon  the march  and wander  in the  woods of              
 the  world,  becoming  after the  various hosts  of Ilkorindi              
 (Elves  who  never  dwelt in  Cor in  Valinor). The  chief of              
 these  was  Thingol,  who heard  Melian and  her nightingales              

 

 singing  and was  enchanted and  fell asleep  for an  age. Me- 
 lian was  one of  the divine  maidens of  the Vala  Lorien who 
 sometimes   wandered   into  the   outer  world.   Melian  and 
 Thingol   became  Queen   and  King   of  woodland   Elves  in 
 Doriath, living in a hall called the Thousand Caves.           
                                                               
   The other Elves  came to  the ultimate  shores of  the West. 
 In  the  North  these  in  those days  sloped westward  in the 
 North  until  only  a narrow  sea divided  them from  the land 
 of  the Gods,  and this  narrow sea  was filled  with grinding 
 ice.  But  at the  point to  which the  Elf-hosts came  a wide 
 dark sea stretched west.                                       
   There  were  two  Valar  of  the  Sea.  Ulmo   (Ylmir),  the 
 mightiest of  all Valar  next to  Manwe, was  lord of  all wa- 
 ters, but dwelt often in Valinor, or in the 'Outer Seas'. Osse 
 and  the lady Oin,(1) whose  tresses lay  through all  the sea, 
 loved  rather the  seas of  the world  that washed  the shores 
 beneath  the Mountains  of Valinor.  Ylmir uprooted  the half- 
 sunk island  where the  Valar had  first dwelt,  and embarking 
 on it the Noldoli and Qendi, who arrived  first, bore  them to 
 Valinor.  The  Teleri  dwelt some  time by  the shores  of the 
 sea  awaiting  him,  and hence  their love  of it.  While they 
 were being  also transported  by Ylmir,  Osse in  jealousy and 
 out of love for their singing chained the  island to  the sea- 
 bottom  far  out  in the  Bay of  Faerie whence  the Mountains 
 of Valinor could dimly  be seen.  No other  land was  near it, 
 and it was called the Lonely  Isle. There  the Teleri  dwelt a 
 long age becoming  different in  tongue, and  learning strange 
 music of Osse, who made the sea-birds for their delight.       
   The Gods  gave a  home in  Valinor to  the other  Eldar. Be- 
 cause  they  longed  even  among   the  Tree-lit   gardens  of 
 Valinor for a  glimpse of  the stars,  a gap  was made  in the 
 encircling  mountains,  and  there  in a  deep valley  a green 
 hill,  Cor,  was  built.  This was  lit from  the West  by the 
 Trees, to the East it  looked out  onto the  Bay of  Faerie and 
 the  Lonely  Isle,  and  beyond  to  the  Shadowy  Seas.  Thus 

 

 some of the blessed light of Valinor filtered into  the Outer               
 Lands,  and  falling  on  the Lonely  Isle caused its western               
 shores to grow green and fair.                                              
   On  the top  of Cor  the city  of the  Elves was  built and               
 called  Tun.  The   Qendi  became   most  beloved   by  Manwe               
 and  Bridhil,  the  Noldoli  by Aule  (the Smith)  and Mandos               
 the  wise.  The  Noldoli  invented  gems  and  made  them  in               


12 

 countless numbers,  filling all  Tun with  them, and  all the               
 halls of the Gods '                                                         
   The greatest in skill and magic of  the Noldoli  was Finn's               
 second  son  Feanor.  (His  elder  son  Fingolfin'  whose son               
 was Finnweg comes into  the tale  later.) He  contrived three               
 jewels  (Silmarils)  wherein  a living  fire combined  in the               
 light  of  the Two  Trees was  set, they  shone of  their own               
 light, impure hands were burned by them.                                    
   The Teleri seeing afar the  light of  Valinor were  tom be-               
 tween desire to rejoin their kindred and to dwell by the sea.               
 Ylmir  taught  them  craft  of  boat-building.  Osse yielding               
 gave them  swans, and  harnessing many  swans to  their boats               
 they sailed to Valinor, and dwelt there  on the  shores where               
 they  could  see the  light of  the Trees,  and go  to Valmar               
 if  they  wished,  but  could  sail and  dance in  the waters               
 touched to light by the radiance that came out past  Cor. The               
 other  Eldar  gave them  many gems, especially opals  and di-               
 amonds and  other pale  crystals which  were strewn  upon the               
 beaches  of  the  Bay  of  Faerie.  They  themselves invented               
 pearls.  Their  chief  town  was  Swanhaven  upon  the shores               
 northward of the pass of Cor.                                               
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
 1. Uinen pencilled against Oin.                                              
 2. The following passage was afterwards added here:                          
                                                                            
       Since  the  Gnomes  or  Noldoli  afterwards came  back into  the &eat 
       Lands, and these tales deal  mostly with  them, it  may here  be said 
       that Lord or  King of  the Noldoli  was Finn.  His sons  were Feanor, 
       Fingolfin,  and Finrod.  Of whom  Feanor was  the most  skillful, the 
       deepest in lore, Fingolfin the mightiest and most valiant, Finrod the 

 

  fairest,  and  the  most wisehearted  and gentle.  The seven  sons of 
  Feanor were Maidros  the tall;  Maglor a  musician and  mighty singer 
  whose voice carried far over hill and sea; Curufin the crafty who in- 
  herited most of his father's skill; Celegorm  the fair;  Crantbir the 
  dark; and Damrod and Diriel who  after were  great hunters.  The sons 
  of Fingolfin were Finweg who  was after  the king  of the  Noldoli in 
  the North  of the  world, and  Turgon of  Gondolin; and  his daughter 
  was  Isfin the  white. The  sons of  Finrod were  Orodreth, Felagoth, 
  Anrod, and Egnor.                                                     
                                                                       
 In the last sentence Felagoth > Felagund, and Orodeth moved to            
 stand after Felagund.                                                  
 3. Finn's second son Feanor and His elder son Fingolfin >  Finn's elder 
 son Feanor and His second son Fingolfin (an  early change,  quite pos- 
 sibly made at the time of the writing of the manuscript).             

 

                             4. 
                                                                       
 The    Gods    were    now   beguiled    by   Morgoth,    who   having 
 passed   seven   ages   in   the  prisons   of  Mandos   in  gradually 
 lightened  pain  came  before  the  conclave  of   the  Gods   in  due 
 course.   He   looks   with   greed   and   malice  upon   the  Eldar, 
 who  also  sit  there  about  the  knees  of the  Gods, and  lusts es- 
 pecially  after  the  jewels.  He  dissembles   his  hatred   and  de- 
 sire   for   revenge.   He   is   allowed   a   humble   dwelling   in 
 Valinor,  and   after  a   while  goes   &eely  about   Valinor,  only 
 Ylmir  foreboding  ill,  while  Tulcas  the  strong  who   first  cap- 
 tured   him   watches   him.   Morgoth   helps   the  Eldar   in  many 
 deeds, but slowly poisons their peace with lies.                       
 He  suggests  that   the  Gods   brought  them   to  Valinor   out  of 
 jealousy,   for   fear   their  marvellous   skill,  and   magic,  and 
 beauty,   should   grow   too   strong   for   them  outside   in  the 
 world.   The   Qendi   and   Teleri   are   little   moved,   but  the 
 Noldoli,  the  wisest  of  the  Elves,   become  affected.   They  be- 
 gin  at  whiles  to  murmur  against  the  Gods  and   their  kindred; 
 they are filled with vanity of their skill.'                           


13 

 Most  of  all  does   Morgoth  fan   the  flames   of  the   heart  of 
 Feanor,  but  all  the  while  he  lusts  for the  immortal Silmarils, 
 although  Feanor  has  cursed  for   ever  anyone,   God  or   Elf  or 
 mortal    that    shall    come    hereafter,   who    touches   them. 
 Morgoth   lying   tells   Feanor   that   Fingolfin   and    his   son 

 

 Finnweg am  plotting to  usurp the  leadership of  the Gnomes 
 from  Feanor  and  his  sons,  and to  gain the  Silmarils. A 
 quarrel breaks out between the sons of  Finn. Feanor  is sum- 
 moned before the  Gods, and  the lies  of Morgoth  laid bare. 
 Feanor  is  banished  from Tun,  and with  him goes  Finn who 
 loves  Feanor  best  of  his  sons, and  many of  the Gnomes. 
 They build a treasury Northward in Valinor  in the  hills near 
 Mandos' halls. Fingolfin rules  the Gnomes  that are  left in 
 Tun.  Thus  Morgoth's  words seem  justified and  the bitter- 
 ness he sowed goes on after his words are disproved.          
   Tulcas  is sent  to put  Morgoth in  chains once  more, but 
 he escapes through the pass of Cor into  the dark  region be- 
 neath  the  feet  of  Timbrenting  called Arvalin,  where the 
 shadow  is  thickest  in  all  the  world.  There   he  finds 
 Ungoliant,  Gloomweaver,  who  dwells  in  a  cleft   of  the 
 mountains,  and  sucks  up  light or  shining things  to spin 
 them out again in webs  of black  and choking  darkness, fog, 
 and  gloom. With  her he  plots revenge. Only a  terrible re- 
 ward will bring her  to dare  the dangers  of Valinor  or the 
 sight of  the Gods.  She weaves  a dense  gloom about  her to 
 protect  her  and swings  on cords  hem pinnacle  to pinnacle 
 till she has scaled the highest peak of the mountains  in the 
 south of Valinor (little guarded because of their  height and 
 their distance from the old fortress  of Morgoth).  She makes 
 a ladder  that Morgoth  can scale.  They creep  into Valinor. 
 Morgoth  stabs  the  Trees  and  Ungoliant  sucks   up  their 
 juices, belching forth  clouds of  blackness. The  Trees suc- 
 cumb  slowly  to  the  poisoned  sword,  and to  the venomous 
 lips of Ungoliant.                                           
   The  Gods are dismayed  by  a twilight  at midday,  and va- 
 pours of black float in about the ways of the city.  They are 
 too  late.  The  Trees die  while they  wail about  them. But 
 Tulcas  and  Orome  and  many  others  hunt  on  horseback in 
 the  gathering  gloom  for  Morgoth.  Wherever  Morgoth  goes 
 there the confusing darkness  is greatest  owing to  the webs 
 of  Ungoliant.  Gnomes  from  the  treasury  of Finn  come in 
 and report that Morgoth is assisted by a spider  of darkness. 
 They  had  seen  them  making  for  the  North.  Morgoth  had 

 

 stayed his flight at the Treasury, slain Finn and many of his                
 men, and carried off the Silmarils  and a  vast hoard  of the                
 most splendid jewels of the Elves.                                           
   In  the  meanwhile  Morgoth  escapes  by   Ungoliant's  aid                
 northward  and  crosses  the  Grinding Ice.  When he  has re-                
 gained  the  northern  regions  of  the world  Ungoliant sum-                
 mons him to pay the other half of her reward. The  first half                
 was the sap of the Trees of  Light. Now  she claims  one half                
 of  the  jewels.  Morgoth  yields  them  up  and  she devours                
 them.  She  is  now become  monstrous, but  he will  not give                
 hei any share in the Silmarils. She enmeshes  him in  a black                
 web, but he is  rescued by  the Balrogs with whips  of flame,                
 and  the  hosts  of the  Orcs; and  Ungoliant goes  away into                
 the uttermost South.                                                         
   Morgoth  returns  to  Angband,  and   his  power   and  the                
 numbers  of  his  demons  and  Orcs  becomes   countless.  He                
 forges an iron crown and sets  therein the  Silmarils, though                
 his hands are burned  black by  them, and  he is  never again                
 free  from  the  pain  of  the  burning.  The crown  he never                
 leaves off for a moment, and  he never  leaves the  deep dun-                
 geons of  his fortress,  governing his  vast armies  from his                
 deep throne.                                                                 
                                                                             
                                      *                                       


14 

                                                                             
 1. Added here:                                                                
                                                                             
       which  Morgoth  flatters.  The  Gods  knew  also of  the coming  of mor- 
       tals or Men that was to be. They  had not  yet told  the Elves,  for the 
       time was  not near,  nor explairied  what was  to be  the realm  of each 
       race, and their relations. Morgoth tells of Men,  and suggests  that the 
       Gods  are  keeping  the  Elves  captive,  so  that  weaker Men  shall be 
       controlled more  easily by  the Gods,  and the  Elves defrauded  of their 
       kingdoms.                                                              
                                                                             
     This was an early addition, probably not materially later than the writ- 
     ing of the manuscript.                                                   

 

                                5.                              
                                                               
   When   it  became   clear  that   Morgoth  had   escaped  the 
 Gods  assemble about  the dead  Trees and  sit in  the darkness 
 stricken  and  dumb  for  a long  while, caring  about nothing. 
 The  day  which  Morgoth  chose  for  his attack  was a  day of 
 festival  throughout  Valinor. Upon  this day  it was  the cus- 
 tom of the chief Valar and  many of  the Elves,  especially the 
 people of Ing  (the Quendi),  to climb  the long  winding paths 
 in  endless  procession  to  Manwe's  halls  upon  Timbrenting. 
 All   the   Quendi  and   some  of   the  Noldoli   (who  under 
 Fingolfin  dwelt  still in  Tun) had  gone to  Timbrenting, and 
 were  singing  upon  its  topmost  height  when   the  watchers 
 from  afar  descried  the  fading  of  the  Trees. Most  of the 
 Noldoli  were  in  the  plain,  and the  Teleri upon  the shore. 
 The fogs and darkness  drift in  now off  the seas  through the 
 pass  of  Cor  as  the  Trees  die.  Feanor summons  the Gnomes 
 to Tun (rebelling against his banishment).'                    
   There is  a vast  concourse on  the square  on the  summit of 
 Cor about  the tower  of Ing,  lit by  torches. Feanor  makes a 
 violent  speech,  and  though  his  wrath  is  for  Morgoth his 
 words are in part  the fruit  of Morgoth's  lies.' He  bids the 
 Gnomes  fly  in  the  darkness  while the  Gods are  wrapped in 
 mourning,  to  seek  freedom  in  the  world  and  to  seek out 
 Morgoth,  now  Valinor  is  no  more  blissful  than  the earth 
 outside.'  Fingolfin  and  Finweg speak  against him.4  The as- 
 sembled  Gnomes  vote  for  flight,  and  Fingolfin  and Finweg 
 yield; they will not desert their people, but they  retain com- 
 mand over a half of the people of the Noldoli.'                
   The  flight  begins.' The  Teleri will  not join.  The Gnomes 
 cannot  escape  without  boats, and  do not  dare to  cross the 
 Grinding  Ice.  They  attempt  to   seize  the   swan-ships  in 
 Swanhaven,  and  a fight  ensues (the  first between  the races 
 of the Earth) in which many Teleri are  slain, and  their ships 
 carried  off.  A  curse  is  pronounced  upon the  Gnomes, that 
 they shall after  suffer often  from treachery  and the  fear of 
 treachery  among  their  own  kindred  in  punishment  for  the 

 

 blood  spilled at Swanhaven.(7) They  sail  North  along the                    
 coast  of  Valinor.  Mandos  sends  an emissary, who speaking                    
 from a high cliff hails them as they sail by, and  warns them                    
 to return, and  when they  will not  speaks the  'Prophecy of                    
 Mandos' concerning the fate of after days.'                                      
   The  Gnomes come  to the  narrowing of  the seas,  and pre-                    
 pare  to  sail.  While  they  are  encamped  upon  the  shore                    
 Feanor and his sons and people sail off taking with  them all                    
 the boats,  and leave  Fingolfin on  the far  shore treacher-                    
 ously,  thus  beginning  the  Curse  of Swanhaven.  They burn                    
 the boats as soon as they land in the East of the  world, and                    
 Fingolfin's people see the light in the  sky. The  same light                    
 also tells the Orcs of the landing.                                              
   Fingolfin's people wander  miserably. Some  under Fingolfin                    
 return to Valinor(9) to seek the Gods' pardon. Finweg leads the                    
 main host North, and over  the Grinding  Ice. Many  are lost.                    
                                                                                 


15 

                                        *                                         
                                                                                 
 1. As  originally writtten,  this sentence  began Finn  and Feanor  summon &c. 
     This  was a  mere slip,  since Finn's  death has  already been  mentioned in 
     the text as first written ($4), and my father later struck out Finn and. He 
     left  the  plural  verb  summon and  their banishment;  this I  have changed 
     to  his  banishment,  since it  is not  said of  the Gnomes  who accompanied 
     Feanor  that they  left Tun  under banishment  (though this  is not  said of 
     Finn  either).  The  Quenta  has his  banishment in  this passage  (p. 114). 
                                                                                 
 2. Added here hastily in pencil:                                                  
                                                                                 
       He  claims  the  lordship  as eldest  son now  Finn is  dead, in  spite of 
       the Gods' decree.                                                          
                                                                                 
 [Except for the  later pencilled  alteration given  in note  5, all  the changes 
 noted  below,  mostly  concerned  to  introduce  the  part  of  Finrod   in  the 
 events,  were  made  at the  same time,  in red  ink. Finrod,  the third  son of 
 Finn/Finwe, appears in the interpolated passage given in $3 note 2.]             
                                                                                 
 3. Added here:                                                                    
                                                                                 
       Feanor and his sons take the unbreakable oath by Timbrenting and           
       the names of Manwe and Bridil to pursue  anyone, Elf,  Mortal, or           
       Orc, who holds the Silmarils.                                              

 

  4. Added here:                                                                   
                                                                                 
        Finrod tries to calm their conflicting anger, but his sons Orodreth,      
        Anrod, and Egnor side with the sons of Feanor.                            
                                                                                 
  5. a half of the people of the Noldoli > a half of the Noldoli of Tun (later 
     pencilled change).                                                           
                                                                                 
  6. Added here but then struck out (see note 7):                                  
                                                                                 
        Finrod does not go, but bids Felagoth (and his other sons) go and         
        cherish the Gnomes of his [?house].                                       
                                                                                 
  7. Added here:                                                                   
                                                                                 
        Finrod is slain at Swanhaven in trying to stay the violence.              
                                                                                 
     This  was  also struck  out (see  note 6)  and a  third version  of Finrod's 
     part entered:                                                                
                                                                                 
        Finrod  and  his  sons  were  not  at  Swanhaven.  They  leave   Tun  reluc- 
        tantly,  and  more  than  the  others carry  away memories  of it,  and even 
        many fair things made there by hands.                                     
                                                                                 
  8. Added here:                                                                   
                                                                                 
        and the curse of war against one another because of Swanhaven.            
                                                                                 
  9. This passage, from Fingolfin's people wander, changed to read:                
                                                                                 
        Finrod and his people arrive. The people of Finrod and Fingolfin           
        wander miserably. Some under Finrod return to Valinor, &c.               
                                                                                 
                                         6.                                       
                                                                                 
    In  the  meanwhile  Manwe  summons  Ifan  Belaurin  to the                    
  council. Her magic  will not  avail to  cure the  Trees. But                    
  Silpion under her spells bears one last great  silver bloom,                    
  and Laurelin one great  golden fruit.  The Gods  fashion the                    
  Moon  and  Sun  from these  and set  them to  sail appointed                    
  courses from West to East, but afterwards they find it safer                    
  to send them in Ylmir's care through  the caverns  and grot-                    
  toes beneath the Earth, to rise  in the  East and  come home                    


16 

 

 again  high  in  the  air  over  the  mountains  of  the  West,  to 
 sink after each journey into the waters of the Outer Seas.          
   The  light  of  Valinor  is  henceforth  not  much  greater  than 
 that  now  scattered  over  the  Earth,  save  that  hem  the ships 
 of  Sun  and  Moon  come  nearer  to  Earth, and  rest for  a while 
 close  to  Valinor.  The  Gods  and  Elves  look  forward to  a fu- 
 ture  time  when  the  'magic  sun  and  moon'  of  the  Trees  may 
 be rekindled   and  the   old  beauty   and  bliss   renewed.  Ylmir 
 foretells(1) that  it  will  only be  achieved with  the aid  of the 
 second  race  of  earth.  But  the  Gods,  even  Manwe,  pay little 
 heed  to  him.   They  are   wroth  and   bitter  because   of  the 
 slaying  at  Swanhaven(2) and  they   fortify  all   Valinor  making 
 the  mountains  impenetrable,  save  at   Cor  which   the  remain- 
 ing   Elves   are   commanded   to   guard,  ceaselessly   and  for 
 ever,  and  let  no  bird  or  beast  or  Elf  or  Man land  on the 
 shores.  of  Faery.  The  magic  isles,  filled  with  enchantment, 
 are  strung  across  the  confines  of  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before 
 the  Lonely  Isle  is  reached  sailing  West,  to entrap  any mar- 
 iners  and  wind  them  in  everlasting  sleep   and  enchantment.' 
 The  Gods  sit  now  behind  the  mountains  and  feast,  and  dis- 
 miss  the  rebel  and  fugitive  Noldoli  from their  hearts. Ylmir 
 alone  remembers  them,  and  gathers  news  of  the   outer  world 
 through all the lakes and rivers.                                   
   At  the  rising  of  the  first  Sun  the  younger   children  of 
 earth  awoke  in  the  far  East.  No  god  came  to   guide  them, 
 but  the  messages  of  Ylmir  little  understood  came  at  whiles 
 to  them.  They  meet   Ilkorindi  and   learn  speech   and  other 
 things  of  them,  and  become  great   friends  of   the  Eldalie. 
 They  spread  through   the  earth,   wandering  West   and  North. 
                                                                    
                                  *                                  
 1. Ylmir foretells changed at the time of writing from Bridhil foretells. 
 2. Added here (hastily in pencil):                                   
      and the flight and ingratitude of the Gnomes.                  

 

  3. Added here:                                                         
                                                                       
       Thus the many emissaries of the Gnomes in after days never reach 
       Valinor.                                                         
                                                                       
                                    7.                                  
                                                                       
    Now  begins  the  time  of  the   great  wars   of  the   powers  of 
  the  North  (Morgoth  and  his  hosts   against  Men,   Ilkorins,  and 
  the   Gnomes    from   Valinor).    Morgoth's   cunning    and   lies, 
  and  the  curse  of   Swanhaven  (as   well  as   the  oaths   of  the 
  sons    of    Feanor    who    swore    the   unbreakable    oath   by 
  Timbrenting  to  treat   all  as   foes  who   had  the   Silmarils  in 
  keeping)  in  these   wars  do   the  greatest   injury  to   Men  and 
  Elves.                                                                
    These  stories  only  tell  a  part  of  the  deeds  of  those days, 
  especially  such  as  relate   to  the   Gnomes  and   the  Silmarils, 
  and  the  mortals  who  became  entangled  in  their  fates.   In  the 
  early  days  Eldar  and  Men   were  of   nearly  equal   stature  and 
  power  of  body,  but  the  Eldar  were  blessed  with   greater  wit, 
  skill,  and  beauty;  and  those  (the  Gnomes)   who  had   dwelt  in 
  Cor  (Koreldar)  as  much   surpassed  the   Ilkorins  as   they  sur- 
  passed  mortals.   Only  in   the  realm   of  Doriath,   whose  queen 
  was  of  divine  race,  did  the  Ilkorins  equal  the  Koreldar.  The 
  Elves  were  immortal,  and   free  from   all  sickness.'   But  they 
  might-be  slain  with  weapons   in  those   days,'  and   then  their 
  spirits   went   back   to  the   halls  of   Mandos  and   awaited  a 
  thousand   years,   or  the   pleasure  of   the  Gods,   before  they 
  were   recalled   to   free   life.'   Men   from  the   first  though 
  slightly  bigger  were  more  &ail,  more  easily  slain,  subject  to 
  ills,  and  grew  old  and  died,  if  not  slain.  What  happened  to 
  their  spirits  was  not  known  to  the  Eldalie.  They  did  not  go 
  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,  and  many  thought  their  fate  was  not 


17 

  in  the  hands  of  the  Valar  after  death.  Though   many,  associ- 
  ating  with  Eldar,  believed  that  their spirits  went to  the west- 
  ern land, this was not true. Men were not born again.4                
    In   after   days   when   owing   to   the   triumph   of   Morgoth 
  Men   and   Elves  became   estranged  the   Eldalie  living   in  the 
  world  faded,  and  Men   usurped  the   sunlight.  The   Eldar  wan-. 

 

 dered, such as remained in the Outer Lands, took to the                   
 moonlight and starlight, the woods and caves.                             
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 1. free from all sickness > free  from death  by sickness  (early change, 
   made at the same time as that given in note 4).                         
 2. Added (rough pencilled insertion): or waste away of sorrow,             
 3. Added at the same time as the insertion given in note  2: and  they were 
   reborn in their children, so that the number grows not.                 
   4 This passage, from They did not go to the halls of Mandos, was struck 
   out and. replaced by the following:                                     
                                                                          
       They  went  to  the halls  of Mandos,  but not  the same  as the halls of 
       awaiting  where  the  Elves  were  sent.  There they  too waited,  but it 
       was  said  that  only Mandos  knew whither  they went  after the  time in 
       his  halls  -  they  were  never  reborn  on  Earth,  and none  ever came 
       back  from  Mandos,  save  only  Beren  son  of  Barahir,  who thereafter 
       spoke  not  to  mortal  Men.  Their  fate after  death was  perchance not 
       in the hands of the Valar.                                          
                                                                          
                                     8                                     
                                                                          
   But  in  these  days  they were  kindred and  allies. Before            
 the  rising  of  the  Sun  and  Moon   Feanor  and   his  sons            
 marched  into  the  North and  sought for  Morgoth. A  host of            
 Orcs  aroused  by  the  burning  ships  resisted them  and was            
 defeated in the First Battle with such loss that  Morgoth pre-            
 tended  to  treat  with  them.  Feanor  refused,  but  he  was            
 wounded  in  the  fight  by  a  Balrog chief   (Gothmog),  and            
 died. Maidros the tall, the elder son,  induced the  Gnomes to            
 meet Morgoth (with as little intent of faith on his side as on            
 Morgoth's).   Morgoth  took   Maidros  captive   and  tortured            
 him,  and hung  him from  a rock  by his  right hand.  The six            
 remaining   sons   of   Feanor  (Maglor,   Celegorm,  Curufin,            
 Damrod,  Diriel,  and  Cranthir) ate  encamped about  the lake            
 Mithrim  in  Hisilome  (Hithlum,  or  Dorlomin,  the  land  of            
 shadows  in  the  North-west),  when  they  hear of  the march            
 of  Finweg and  his men'  who have  crossed the  Grinding Ice.            
 The Sun rises  as they  march, their  blue and  silver banners            
 are unfurled, flowers spring beneath the feet of their armies.            

 

 The  Orcs   dismayed  at   the  light   retreat  to   Angband.  But 
 there  is  little  love  between  the  two  hosts  of   Gnomes  en- 
 camped   now   on   opposite   shores   of  Mithrim.   Vast  smokes 
 and   vapours   are  made   and  sent   forth  from   Angband,  and 
 the  smoking  top  of  Thangorodrim  (the   highest  of   the  Iron 
 Mountains  around  Morgoth's  fortress)  can   be  seen   from  far 
 away.  'The  North  shakes  with  the  thunder  under   the  earth. 
 Morgoth  is  forging  armouries.  Finweg   resolves  to   heal  the 
 feud.  Alone  he  goes  in  search  of  Maidros.  Aided by  the va- 
 pours,   which   me   now  floating   down  and   filling  Hithlum, 
 and  by  the  withdrawal  of  Orcs  and  Balrogs  to   Angband,  he 
 finds him, but cannot release him.                                     
   Manwe,   to   whom   birds   bring   news  upon   Timbrenting  of 
 all  things  which  his  farsighted  eyes  do  not see  upon earth, 
 fashions  the  race  of  eagles,  and sends  them under  their king 
 Thorndor  to  dwell   in  the   crags  of   the  North   and  watch 
 Morgoth.  The  eagles  dwell  out  of  reach  of  Orc  and  Balrog, 
 and   are   great   foes   of  Morgoth   and  his   people.  Finweg 
 meets  Thorndor  who  bears  him  to  Maidros.  There  is   no  re- 
 leasing  the  enchanted  bond  upon  his  wrist.  In  his  agony he 


18 

 begs  to  be  slain, but  Finweg cuts  off his  hand, and  they are 
 both   borne   away  by   Thorndor,  and   come  to   Mithrim.  The 
 feud  is  healed  by  the  deed  of  Finweg  (except  for  the oath 
 of the Silmarils).                                                     
                                                                       
                                   *                                    
                                                                       
  1. the march of Finweg and his  men >  the march  of Fingolfin  and his 
    sons and his men and Felagoth and the sons  of Finrod  (This change 
    belongs with those made in red ink in $5 and concerns the shift from 
    Fingolfin to Finrod as the Gnomish lord who returned to Valinor, see 
    $5 note 9.)                                                        
                                                                       
                                   9.                                   
                                                                       
   The  Gnomes  march  forward  and   beleaguer  Angband.               
 They  meet Ilkorins and  Men. At  that time  Men already               
 dwelt in the woods of the North, and Ilkorins also. They               
 long warred with  Morgoth.(1) Of Ilkorin race  was Barahir               

 

 and  his  son  Beren.  Of  mortal  race  was  Hurin  son of                   
 Gumlin, whose  wife was  Morwen," they  lived in  the woods                   
 upon  the  borders of  Hithlum. These  come after  into the                   
 tales.                                                                        
   Morgoth sends out his  armies and  breaks the  leaguer of                   
 Angband, and  from that  time the  fortunes of  his enemies                   
 decline.' Gnomes and  Ilkorins and  Men are  scattered, and                   
 Morgoth's  emissaries  go  among  them with  lying promises                   
 and false suggestions of the greed and treachery of each to                   
 each. Because  of the  curse of  Swanhaven these  often are                   
 believed by the Gnomes.                                                       
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  found  the  realm  of Nargothrond                   
 on the  banks of  the Narog  in the  south of  the Northern                   
 lands.4 Many Gnomes  take service  with Thingol  and Melian                   
 of the  Thousand Caves  in Doriath.  Because of  the divine                   
 magic of Melian Doriath is the safest from the raids of the                   
 Orcs, and it is prophesied that only treachery  from within                   
 will cause the realm to fall.                                                 
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
 [This section was substantially interpolated and altered (all in red ink, see 
 $5, except for the change given in note 2).]                                  
                                                                              
 1. Added here:                                                                 
                                                                              
       This is the time  of Morgoth's  retreat, and  the growth  and prosperity 
       of  Men,  a  time  of growth  and  birth  and  flowering known  as the 
       'Siege of Angband'.                                                     
                                                                              
 2. This passage, from Of Ilkorin race, was emended to read:                    
                                                                              
       In later times of mortal race was Barahir  and his  son Beren.  Of mor- 
       tal race also  were Hurin  and Huor  sons of  Gumlin. Hurin's  wife was 
       Morwen, &c.                                                             
                                                                              
     3. Here  was  added  The  men of  Barahir rescue  Celegorm, but  this was 
     struck out and the following insertion made:                              
                                                                              
       In  the  Leaguer  of  Angband  Fingolfin's  host guards  the North-west 
       on  borders  of  Hithlum;  Felagoth  [>  Felagund]  and  the   sons  of 
       Finrod the South and the [?plains]  of Sirion  (or Broseliand);  the sons 

 

  of  Feanor  the  East.  Fingolfin  is slain  when Morgoth  breaks the 
  leaguer. Felagoth [>Felagund] is saved by Barahir  the Bold  a mortal 
  and escapes south  to found  Nargothrond, swearing  a vow  of friend- 
  ship to the race of Barahir. The sons of Feanor live  a wild  and no- 
  mad  life  in  the  East,  warring  with  Dwarves  and Orcs  and Men. 
  Fingolfin's sons Finweg and Turgon still hold out in the North.       


19 

                                                                      
 4. This sentence was changed to read:                                  
                                                                      
  Felagoth  [>  Felagund]  and   his  brothers   found  the   realm  of 
  Nargothrond  on  the  banks  of  Narog  in the  south of  the Northern 
  lands.  They  are  aided  by  Celegorm  and  Gurufin  who  long  while 
  dwelt in Nargothrond.                                                
                                                                      
                                   10.                                 
                                                                      
 The   power   of   Morgoth   begins  to   spread  once   more.  One 
 by  one  he  overthrows  Men  and  Elves  in  the  North.  Of these 
 a  famous  chieftain  of  Ilkorindi  was  Barahir,  who   had  been 
 a  friend  of  Celegorm  of  Nargothrond.  Barahir  is  driven into 
 hiding,  his  hiding  betrayed,  and Barahir  slain; his  son Beren 
 after   a   life   outlawed  flees   south,  crosses   the  Shadowy 
 Mountains,  and   after  grievous   hardships  comes   to  Doriath. 
 Of  this  and  his  other  adventures  are  told  in  the   Lay  of 
 Leithian.  He  gains  the  love  of  Tinuviel  'the  nightingale' - 
 his  own  name  for  Luthien   -  the   daughter  of   Thingol.  To 
 win  her  Thingol,  in  mockery,  requires  a  Silmaril   from  the 
 crown  of  Morgoth.  Beren  sets  out  to  achieve  this,  is  cap- 
 tured,  and  set  in  dungeon  in  Angband,  but conceals  his real 
 identity  and  is  given  as  a  slave to  Thu the  hunter. Luthien 
 is  imprisoned  by  Thingol,  but  escapes  and  goes in  search of 
 Beren.   With  the   aid  of   Huan  lord   of  dogs   she  rescues 
 Beren,   and   gains   entrance   to   Angband  where   Morgoth  is 
 enchanted  and  finally   wrapped  in   slumber  by   her  dancing. 
 They  get  a  Silmaril  and  escape,  but  are  barred at  gates of 
 Angband   by   Carcaras   the   Wolfward.   He  bites   o   Beren's 
 hand  which  holds  the  Silmaril,  and  goes  mad  with   the  an- 
 guish of its burning within him,                                      
 They   escape   and   after   many    wanderings   get    back   to 
 Doriath.   Carcaras   ravening  through   the  woods   bursts  into 
 Doriath.  There  follows  the  Wolf-hunt   of  Doriath,   in  which 

 

  
                                                                            
 Carcaras is slain, and Huan is killed in defence  of Beren.                 
 Beren  is however  mortally wounded  and dies  in Luthien's                 
 arms.  Some  songs  say  that  Luthien  went even  over the                 
 Grinding Ice, aided by the power of her divine  mother, Me-                 
 lian,  to  Mandos'  halls  and  won  him back;  others that                 
 Mandos hearing his tale released him. Certain it is that he                 
 alone  of  mortals  came  back from  Mandos and  dwelt with                 
 Luthien and never spoke to Men again,  living in  the woods                 
 of Doriath and in the Hunters' Wold, west of Nargothrond.'                  
   In the days of his outlawry Beren had been  befriended by                 
 Hurin of Hithlum, son of  Gumlin. In  the woods  of Hithlum                 
 Hurin still remains unbowed to the yoke of Morgoth.                         
                                                                            
                                     *                                       
                                                                            
  1. a famous chieftain of Ilkorindi > a famous chieftain of Men  (cf. $9 
   note 2).                                                                  
  2. This sentence, following Beren sets out to  achieve this,  was struck 
   through and replaced by the following (in red ink):                       
                                                                            
      (Beren sets out to achieve  this,) and  seeks the  aid of  Felagoth in 
      Nargothrond. Felagoth warns him  of the  oath of  the sons  of Feanor, 
      and that even if he gets the Silmaril they will not, if they  can pre- 
      vent it, allow him to take it to Thingol. But faithful to his own oath 
      he  gives  him aid.  The kingdom  is given  to Orodreth,  and Felagoth 
      and  Beren  march  North. They  are overcome  in battle.  Felagoth and 
      Beren and a small  band escape,  and creeping  back despoil  the dead. 
      Disguising themselves as  Orcs they  get as  far as  the house  of the 
      Lord  of  Wolves. Them  they are  discovered, and  placed in  prison - 
      and devoured one by one.                                               
        Celegorm  discovered what  was  the secret  mission of  Felagoth and 


20 

      Beren. He gathers his dogs and  hunters and  goes a-hunting.  He finds 
      the traces of battle. Then he finds  Luthien in  the woods.  She flies 
      but  is  overtaken  by  Huan  the  chief  of  Celegorm's dogs,  who is 
      sleepless,  and she  cannot enchant  him. He  bears her  off. Celegorm 
      offers redress.                                                        
                                                                            
    From the second sentence  Felagoth warns  him of  the oath...  this en- 
    tire passage was then struck through and See  tale of  Luthien written 
    across it; Felagoth  in the  surviving sentence  at the  beginning was 
    changed to Felagund; and They fall in the power of the Lord  of Wolves 
    (Thu) was added.                                                        

 

                              
                                                                       
 3. Here was added, perhaps at the time of the writing of the manuscript: 
                                                                       
      (But  Mandos  in  payment  exacted that  Luthien should  become mortal 
      as Beren.)                                                        
                                                                       
                                   11.                                  
                                                                       
   Maidros  forms  now  a league  against Morgoth  seeing that          
 he will destroy them all, one by one, if  they do  not unite.          
 The  scattered  Ilkorins  and  Men  are   gathered  together.          
 Curufin  and  Celegorm  despatch  a  host  (but not  all they          
 could  gather,  thus breaking  their word)  from Nargothrond.          
 The  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  refuse  to  be  led  by Finweg,          
 and go  in search  of the  hosts of  Maidros and  Maglor. Men          
 march  up   from  South   and  East   and  West   and  North.          
 Thingol will not send from  Doriath.' Some  say out  of self-          
 ish policy, others  because of  the wisdom  of Melian  and of          
 fate  which  decreed  that  Doriath  should  become  the only          
 refuge of the Eldar  from Morgoth  afterwards. Part  was cer-          
 tainly  due  to  the Silmaril,  which Thingol  now possessed,          
 and  which  Maidros  had  demanded  with  haughty  words. The          
 Gnomes  of  Doriath  are  allowed'  nonetheless  to  join the          
 league.                                                                
   Finweg  advances   into  the   Plain  of   Thirst  (Dor-na-          
 Fauglith)  before  the  Iron  Mountains  and defeats  an Orc-          
 army,  which  falls  back.  Pursuing  he  is  overwhelmed  by          
 countless  hordes  suddenly  loosed  on  him  from  the deeps          
 of  Angband,  and  there  is  fought  the  field   of  Unnum-          
 bered Tears, of which no  elfin songs  tell except  in lamen-          
 tation.                                                                
   The  mortal  armies,  whose  leaders  had mostly  been cor-          
 rupted or bribed by Morgoth, desert or flee away:  all except          
 Hurin's  kin.  From  that  day  Men and  Elves have  been es-          
 tranged,  save the  descendents of  Hurin. Finweg  falls, his          
 blue and silver banner  is destroyed.  The Gnomes  attempt to          
 fall  back  towards  the  hills  and Taur-na-Fuin  (forest of          
 night). Hurin holds the rearguard, and all his men are slain,          
 so that not a single man  escapes to  bring news  to Hithlum.          
 By Morgoth's  orders Hurin,  whose axe  had slain  a thousand          

 

 Orcs, is taken alive.  By Hurin  alone was  Turgon (Finweg's             
 brother) son of Fingolfin enabled to cut  his way  back into             
 the hills with a part of  his people.  The remainder  of the             
 Gnomes  and  Ilkorins would  have been  all slain  or taken,             
 but for the arrival of Maidros, Curufin  and Celegorm  - too             
 late for the main battle.                                                
   They  are  beaten  back  and  driven into  the South-east,             
 where  they  long  time  dwelt,  and  did  not  go  back  to             
 Nargothrond.  There  Orodreth   ruled  over   the  remnant.'             
 Morgoth  is  utterly  triumphant. His  armies range  all the             
 North,   and  press   upon  the   borders  of   Doriath  and             
 Nargothrond. The slain of his enemies are piled into a great             
 hill  upon Dor-na-Fauglith,  but there  the grass  comes and             
 grows green where all else is desert, and no Orc  dare tread             
 upon that hill where the Gnomish swords rust.                            


21 

   Hurin  is  taken  to  Angband  and  defies Morgoth.  He is             
 chained  in  torment.  Afterward Morgoth  offers him  a high             
 captaincy in his forces, a wealth of jewels, and freedom, if             
 he  will  lead  an  army against  Turgon. None  knew whither             
 Turgon   had   departed  save   Hurin.  Hurin   refused  and             
 Morgoth  devised  a  torture. He  set  him upon  the highest             
 peak  of  Thangorodrim  and  cursed him  with never-sleeping             
 sight like the Gods, and he cursed his seed  with a  fate of             
 ill-hap, and bade Hurin watch the working of it.                         
                                                                         
                                    *                                     
                                                                         
   1. This passage, from Curufin and Celegorm despatch a host, was altered 
    by hastily made changes and additioas:                                
                                                                         
      Curufin  and  Celegorm  come from their  wandering; but  Orodreth be- 
      cause of Felagund his brother will  not come:  Thingol also  sends but 
      few of his folk.  The Gnomes  of Feanor's  sons refuse  to be  led by 
      Finweg, and the battle is divided into two  hosts, one  under Maidros 
      and  Maglor,  and  one  under Finweg  and Turgon.  Men march  up from 
      South  and  East  and  West  and  North. Thingol  sends but  few from 
      Doriath.                                                            
                                                                         
 2. Added here: by Thingol.                                                

 

  
                                                                      
 3. This passage was changed to read:                                   
                                                                      
       They are beaten back and driven into the South-east, where they 
       long time dwelt. In Nargothrond Orodreth ruled still.           
                                                                      
                                     12.                               
                                                                      
   Morwen  wife  of   Hurin  was   left  alone   in  the   woods.  Her 
 son   Turin   was  a   young  boy   of  seven,   and  she   was  with 
 child.   Only   two   old   men    Halog   and    Mailgond   remained 
 faithful   to   her.   The   men   of   Hithlum   were   slain,   and 
 Morgoth   breaking   his   words   had  driven   all  men,   who  had 
 not   escaped   (as   few   did)  away   South,  into   Hithlum.  Now 
 most   of   these   were  faithless   men   who   had   deserted  the 
 Eldar   in   the   battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears.  Yet   he  penned 
 them   behind   the   Shadowy   Mountains,   nonetheless,   and  slew 
 such  as  wandered  forth,  desiring  to   keep  them   from  fellow- 
 ship  with  Elves.  But  little  love  all  the  same  did  they show 
 to  Hurin's  wife.  Wherefore  it  came  into   her  heart   to  send 
 Turin  to  Thingol,  because   of  Beren   Hurin's  friend   who  had 
 wedded  Luthien.  The  'Children  of  Hurin'   tells  of   his  fate, 
 and  how  Morgoth's   curse  pursued   him,  so   that  all   he  did 
 turned out unhappily against his will.                                
   He   grew   up   in  Thingol's   court,  but   after  a   while  as 
 Morgoth's   power   grew   no   news   from   Hithlum  came   and  he 
 heard  no  more  of  Morwen  or   of  his   sister  Nienor   whom  he 
 had  not  seen.  Taunted  by  Orgof,  of  the  kin  of  King Thingol, 
 he   unwitting   of   his   growing  strength   killed  him   at  the 
 king's  table  with  a  drinking  horn.  He  fled the  court thinking 
 himself  an  outlaw,  and  took  to  war  against  all,  Elves,  Men, 
 and   Orcs,   upon  the   borders  of   Doriath,  gathering   a  wild 
 band of hunted Men and Elves about him.                               
   One  day  in  his  absence   his  men   captured  Beleg   the  bow- 
 man,  who  had  befriended   Turin  of   old.  Turin   released  him, 
 and  is  told   how  Thingol   had  forgiven   his  deed   long  ago. 
 Beleg  brings  him  to  abandon  his  war   against  Elves,   and  to 
 assuage   his  wrath   upon  the   Orcs.  The   fame  of   the  deeds 
 upon  the  marches   and  the   prowess  of   Beleg  the   Gnome  and 
 Turin  son  of  Hurin  against   the  Orcs   is brought   to  Thingol 

 

  and  to  Morgoth.  One  only  of  Turin's  band,  Blodrin  Ban's 
  son, hates the new life with little plunder and harder fighting. 


22 

  He betrays the secret  place of  Turin to  the Orcs.  Their camp 
  is  surprised,  Turin  is  taken  and  dragged  to  Angband (for 
  Morgoth  has  begun  to fear  he will  escape his  curse through 
  his  valour and  the protection  of Melian);  Beleg is  left for 
  dead  under  a  heap  of  slain.  He is  found by  Thingol's men 
  come  to  summon  them  to  a  feast  at  the   Thousand  Caves. 
  Melian heals him, and he sets out  to track  the Orcs.  Beleg is 
  the most  skilled in  tracking of  all who  have lived,  but the 
  mazes  of  Taur-na-Fuin  bewilder  him.   Them  in   despair  he 
  sees  the  lamp  of  Flinding   son  of   Fuilin,  a   Gnome  of 
  Nargothrond  who  was  captured  by  Orcs  and  had   long  been 
  a thrall in the mines of Morgoth, but escaped.                   
    Of  Flinding  he  learns  news of  the Orc-band  that captured 
  Turin.  They  hide and  watch the  host go  by laden  with spoil 
  along  the  Orc-road  through  the  heart  of the  forest, which 
  the  Orcs  use  when  in need  of haste.  They dread  the forest 
  beyond  the  road  as  much  as  Elf  or  Man.  Turin   is  seen 
  dragged  along  and  whipped.  The  Orcs  leave  the  forest and 
  descend  the  slopes  toward  Dor-na-Fauglith,  and   encamp  in 
  a  dale  in  sight  of  Thangorodrim.  Beleg  shoots  the  wolf- 
  sentinels  and  steals  with  Flinding into  the camp.  With the 
  greatest difficulty and  direst peril  they carry  the senseless 
  Turin  away  and  lay  him in  a dell  of thick  thorn-trees. In 
  striking  off  his  bonds  Beleg  pricks  Turin's  foot;  he  is 
  roused,  and  demented  thinks  the  Orcs  are  tormenting  him, 
  he  leaps  on  Beleg  and  kills  him  with  his own  sword. The 
  covering  of  Flinding's  lamp  falls  off  and  seeing  Beleg*s 
  face he is  turned to  stone. The  Orcs roused  by his  cries as 
  he  leaped upon  Beleg discover  his escape  but are  driven far 
  and  wide  by a  dreadful storm  of thunder  and deluge.  In the 
  morning   Flinding   sees  them   marching  over   the  steaming 
  waste  of  Dor-na-Fauglith.  Beleg  is  buried  with his  bow in 
  the dell.                                                        
    Flinding  leads  the  dazed  unwitting  Turin  towards safety. 
  His  wits  return  by  Ivrin's  lake  where  are the  sources of 
  Narog,  and  he  weeps  a  great  while,  and  makes a  song for 

 

 Beleg, the 'Bowman's Friendship', which afterwards be-          
 came a battle-song of the enemies of Morgoth.                   
                                                                
                               13.                               
                                                                
   Flinding  leads  Turin  to  Nargothrond.  There  Turin  gains 
 the  love  and  loves  against his  will Finduilas  daughter of 
 Orodreth,  who  had  been  betrothed  before  his  captivity to 
 Flinding.  He  fights  against  his  love  out  of  loyalty  to 
 Flinding, but Flinding  seeing that  Finduilas loves  Turin be- 
 comes embittered.                                               
   Turin  leads  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  forsake their 
 secrecy  and  hidden   warfare,  and   fights  the   Orcs  more 
 openly.'  He  has  Beleg's  sword  forged  anew,  into  a black 
 blade  with  shining  edges,  and  he  is  from this  given the 
 name  of  'Mormakil'  or  black-sword.   The  fame   of  Morma- 
 kil  reaches  even to  Thingol. Turin  adopts the  name instead 
 of  'Turin'.  For  a  long while  Turin and  the Gnomes  of Na- 
 rog are victorious and their  realm reaches  to the  sources of 
 Narog, and from  the western  sea to  the confines  of Doriath. 
 There is a stay in the might of Morgoth.                        
   Morwen  and  Nienor  are  able  to  journey to  Thingol leav- 
 ing  their  goods  in  the  care  of  Brodda  who had  wedded a 
 kinswoman  of  Morwen.  They  learn   at  Thingol's   court  of 
 the  loss  of  Turin.  News  comes  to  them  of  the  fall  of 
 Nargothrond.  Morgoth  had  suddenly  loosed  a  great  army on 
 them, and with them one of  the first  and mightiest'  of those 
 Dragons  that  bred in  his deep  places and  for a  long while 
 troubled the Northern lands of Men and Elves.'                   
   The   host   of  Narog   is  overwhelmed.   Flinding  wounded 
 refuses  Turin's  succour  and  dies  reproaching   him.  Turin 
 hastes  back  to  Nargothrond  but  the  Dragon  and  Orcs come 


23 

 thither before he can put it in defence, and all the fair halls 
 beneath  the  earth  are  plundered,  and  all  the  women  and 
 maidens of  Narog herded  as slaves  in captivity.  Turin seeks 
 to  slay  the Dragon,  but is  held immovable  by the  spell of 
 his  eyes,  while  the  Dragon  Glorung(4) taunts  him. Glorung 
 then offers  him  freedom  either to  follow seeking  to rescue 

 

 his 'stolen love' Finduilas, or to do his duty and go  to the 
 rescue of his mother and sister who are  living (as  he lying 
 says) in great  misery in  Hithlum. Turin  forsakes Finduilas 
 against his heart (which if he had obeyed his  uttermost fate 
 would  not  have  befallen  him)  and  believing  the serpent 
 goes  to seek  Hithlum. Glorung  lies in  the caves  of Narog 
 and  gathers beneath  him all  the gold  and silver  and gems 
 there hoarded.                                               
   Turin   after   long   wandering   goes  to   Hithlum.  But 
 Morwen  and  Nienor  are in  Thingol's court,  when survivors 
 tell of the fall of Nargothrond, and of  Turin, and  some say 
 Turin  escaped alive,  and some  say he  was turned  to stone 
 by the  eyes of  the serpent  and lived  still in  bondage in 
 Nargothrond.  Morwen  and  Nienor  at  last  get  Thingol  to 
 give them men to go against Glorung, or to  spy out  his lair 
 at least.                                                    
   Turin slays Brodda in his hall, in his anger when  he finds 
 Morwen's  hall  and  lands  empty  and  despoiled.  Repenting 
 his  deed  he  flies from  Hithlum again,  and seeks  no more 
 after his kin. Desiring to forget his past he takes  the name 
 of  Turambar (Turmarth)  'Conqueror of  Fate', and  gathers a 
 new  people,  'Men  of  the  Woods', east  of Narog,  whom he 
 rules, and lives in peace.                                   
   The  expedition  of  Thingol,  with  whom  ride  Morwen and 
 Nienor,  views  Narog from  a hill-top.  The Elves  ride down 
 towards  the  lair,(5) but Glorung  coming  out lies  into the 
 stream and a huge hissing and great vapour  goes up,  so that 
 their horses turn and  fly. Morwen's  horse and  Nienor's are 
 also panic-stricken and gallop wildly in  the mist.  When the 
 mist  clears  Nienor  finds  herself  face  to face  with the 
 Dragon,  whose eye  holds her,  and a  spell of  darkness and 
 utter forgetfulness comes  upon her.  She wanders  witless in 
 the woods. At last her senses return  but she  remembers lit- 
 tle.' Orcs see her and  chase her,  but are  driven off  by a 
 band  of  'Woodmen'  under  Turambar, who  lead her  to their 
 pleasant homes.                                              
   As they pass the falls of Silver  Bowl a  shivering touches 
 her. She lives amid the woodfolk  and is  loved by  Tamar the 

 

 Lame, but at  last weds  Turambar, who  calls her  Niniel 'the 
 Tearful' since he first found her weeping.                    
   Glorung  begins  to  raid  across Narog,  md Orcs  gather to 
 him.  The  woodmen  slay  many  of  them,  and  Glorung  hear- 
 ing  of  their dwelling  comes crawling  and filled  with fire 
 over  Narog  and  through  the woods  against them.  He leaves 
 a  blasted  track behind  him. Turambar  ponders how  the hor- 
 ror can  be warded  from his  land. He  marches with  his men, 
 and Niniel foreboding evil rides with him,' till they  can see 
 the  burning  track of  Glorung, and  the smoking  place where 
 he  lies.  Between  them runs  a stream  in a  deep-cloven ra- 
 vine  after  falling  over  the  high  falls  of  Silver Bowl. 
 Turambar asks for volunteers and  obtains six  only to  lie in 
 the  ravine over  which the  Dragon must  pass. The  seven de- 
 part. They climb the  far side  of the  ravine at  evening and 
 cling near its edge in the  trees. The  next morning  all have 
 slunk away and Turambar is alone.                             
   Glorung   creeps   over.   Turambar   transfixes   him  with 
 Gurtholfin(8) 'Wand  of  Death',   his  black   sword. Glorung 
 coils back  in anguish  and lies  dying. Turambar  comes forth 
 to retrieve his sword, and  places his  foot upon  Glorung and 
 exults. But the venom  of Glorung  gushes out  as he  tugs out 
 his sword,  and he  falls in  a swoon.  The watchers  see that 


24 

 Glorung is slain, but Turin  does not  return. Niniel  goes in 
 search  of  him  and finds  him lying  beside Glorung.  As she 
 is  tending  him,  Glorung  opens  his  eyes  and  speaks, and 
 tells her who Turambar is, and  lifts his spell from  off her. 
 Then  she  knows  who  she is,  and knows  his tale  true from 
 things  Turambar  has  told  her. Filled  with horror  and an- 
 guish she flies and casts  herself over  Silver Bowl  and none 
 ever  found  her  body  again.  Tamar  followed her  and heard 
 her lament.                                                   
   Turin  comes  back  in  triumph.  He  asks  for  Niniel, but 
 none  dare tell  him. Then  Tamar comes  and tells  him. Turin 
 slays  him,  and  taking  Gurtholfin  bids  it  slay  him. The 
 sword  answers that  his blood  is sweet  as any  other's, and 
 pierces him to the heart. Turin is buried beside  Silver Bowl, 

 

 and his name carved in characters of Nargothrond upon a                   
 rock. Beneath is written Niniel.                                          
   Some  say  Morwen  released  from spell  by Glorung's                   
 death came that way and read the stone.                                   
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 1. Added here: At his advice Narog is bridged (cf. note 5).                
 2. one of the first and mightiest > that first and mightiest.             
 3. Added  here:  even  Glomund,  who  was  at  the  Battle of  Tears (see 
   note 4).                                                                
 4. Glorung > Glomund here and subsequently, except  at the  last occur- 
   rence.                                                                  
 5. towards the lair > towards the bridge leading to the lair (cf. note 1). 
 6. she remembers little > she remembers not even her name.                 
 7. Added here: though she is with child,                                   
 8. Gurtholfin > Gurtholfir at both occurrences.                             
                                                                          
                                    14.                                    
                                                                          
   Hurin  was  released  by  Morgoth  after  the end  of Turin             
 and  Nienor,  for  Morgoth thought  still to use him.  He ac-             
 cused Thingol's faint heart and  ungentleness of  Turin's un-             
 happiness,  and  Hurin  wandering  bowed with  grief pondered             
 his words and was embittered by them.                                     
   Hurin   and   outlaws  come   to  Nargothrond,   whom  none             
 dare plunder for dread of the spirit of  Glorung' or  even of             
 his  memory.  They  slay Mim  the Dwarf  who had  taken pos-             
 session and enchanted all the gold. Hurin  casts the  gold at             
 Thingol's  feet with  reproaches. Thingol  will not  have it,             
 and bears with Hurin, until goaded  too far  he bids  him be-             
 gone.  Hurin  wanders  away  and   seeks  Morwen,   and  many             
 for ages after  related that  they met  them together  in the             
 woods lamenting their children.                                           
   The  enchanted  gold  lays  its spell  on Thingol.  He sum-             
 mons  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost  to   come  and             
 fashion it into beautiful things, and to  make a  necklace of             
 great  wonder whereon  the Silmaril  shall hang.  The Dwarves             
 plot treachery, and Thingol bitter with the curse of the gold             
 denies  them  their  reward. After  their smithying  they are             

 

  driven   away   without   payment.   The  Dwarves   come  back;               
  aided  by  treachery  of  some  Gnomes  who  also  were  bitten               
  by the lust of the gold, they surprise Thingol on a  hunt, slay               
  him,  and  surprise  the  Thousand  Caves  and   plunder  them.               
  Melian  they  cannot  touch.  She  goes  away  to   seek  Beren               
  and Luthien.                                                                  
    The  Dwarves  are  ambushed  at  a  ford  by  Beren  and  the               
  brown  and  green  Elves  of  the wood,  and their  king slain,               
  from  whose  neck  Beren  takes  the  'Nauglafring'(2) or neck-               
  lace of the Dwarves, with its Silmaril. It is said that Luthien               
  wearing  that  jewel  is  the  most  beautiful thing  that eyes               
  have  ever  seen  outside  Valinor.  But  Melian  warned  Beren               
  of the curse of the gold and of the Silmaril.  The rest  of the               


25 

  gold is drowned in the river.                                                 
    But   the   'Nauglafring'(3) remains  hoarded   secretly   in               
  Beren's   keeping.   When   Mandos   let   Beren   return  with               
  Luthien,  it  was  only at  the price  that Luthien  should be-               
  come  as  shortlived as  Beren the  mortal. Luthien  now fades,               
  even  as  the  Elves  in  later  days faded  as Men  yew strong               
  and  took  the  goodness  of  earth (for  the Elves  needed the               
  light  of  the  Trees).  At  last she  vanished, and  Beren was               
  lost, looking in vain  for her,  and his  son Dior  ruled after               
  him.  Dior  re-established  Doriath  and  grew proud,  and wore               
  the  'Nauglafring',  and   the  fame   of  the   Silmaril  went               
  abroad.  After  vain  bargaining  the sons  of Feanor  made war               
  on  him  (the  second  slaying  of  Elf  by Elf)  and destroyed               
  him,  and  took  the  'Nauglafring'.  They quarrelled  over it,               
  owing to the curse  of the  gold, until  only Maglor  was left.               
  But  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior  was  saved  and  carried  away               
  to the mouth of the river Sirion.4                                            
                                                                               
                                        *                                       
                                                                               
  1. The name  Glorung is  not here  emended, as  in $13,  to Glomund,  but a 
     d is written over the g, sc.  Glorund (the  earliest form  of the  name of 
     the Dragon).                                                               
  2. At the first occurrence only of Nauglafring, th is pencilled above, i.e. 
     Nauglathring or Nauglathfring.                                             
  3. Above  Nauglafring  here   my  father   wrote  Dweorgmene   [Old  English, 

 

  'Dwarf-necklace']; this was struck out, and Glingna Nauglir substi-         
  tuted.                                                                      
  4 The conclusion of this section was changed very soon  after it  was writ- 
  ten, since in $17 already as first written the Nauglafring is  with Elwing 
  at the mouth of Sirion:                                                     
                                                                             
     After  vain  bargaining  the  sons  of Feanor  made war  on him  (the sec- 
     ond  slaying  of  Elf  by  Elf)  and  destroyed  him. But  Elwing daughter 
     of  Dior,  Beren's son,  escaped, and  was carried  away by  faithful ser- 
     vants   to   the  mouth   of  the   river  Sirion.   With  her   went  the 
     Nauglafring.                                                              
                                                                             
                                      15.                                     
                                                                             
 The  great  river  Sirion  flowed  through  the   lands  South-              
 west; at  its mouth  was a  great delta,  and its  lower course              
 ran through wide green and fertile  lands, little  peopled save              
 by birds and  beasts because  of the  Orc-raids; but  they were              
 not  inhabited  by  Orcs,  who  preferred  the  northern woods,              
 and  feared  the power  of Ylmir  - for  Sirion's mouth  was in              
 the Western Seas.                                                            
 Turgon  Fingolfin's son  had a  sister Isfin.  She was  lost in              
 Taurna-Fuin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered   Tears.  There              
 she  was  trapped  by  the   Dark  Elf   Eol.  Their   son  was              
 Meglin.  The  people  of  Turgon  escaping  aided by  the prow-              
 ess  of  Hurin  were lost  from the  knowledge of  Morgoth, and              
 indeed of all in the  world save  Ylmir. In  a secret  place in              
 the  hills  their  scouts  climbing  to  the tops  discovered a              
 broad  valley  entirely encircled  by the  hills in  rings ever              
 lower  as  they  came towards  the centre.  Amid this  ring was              
 a  wide  land  without hills,  except for  one rocky  hill that              
 stuck up from the plain, not right at  the centre,  but nearest              
 to  that  part of  the outer  wall which  marched close  to the              
 edge of Sirion.'                                                             
 Ylmir's  messages  come  up  Sirion  bidding  them   take  ref-              
 uge in  this valley,  and teaching  them spells  of enchantment              
 to place upon all the hills about, to keep off foes  and spies.              
 He foretells that their fortress shall stand longest of all the              
 refuges  of  the  Elves  against  Morgoth,  and   like  Doriath              
 never  be  overthrown  -  save  by  treachery from  within. The              

 

  spells are strongest near to Sirion, although here  the encir-            


26 

  cling  mountains  are  lowest.  Here the  Gnomes dig  a mighty            
  winding tunnel under the roots of  the mountains,  that issues            
  at last in the Guarded Plain. Its outer entrance is guarded by            
  the spells of Ylmir; its inner is  watched unceasingly  by the            
  Gnomes. It is set there in case those within ever need  to es-            
  cape, and as  a way  of more  rapid exit  from the  valley for            
  scouts,  wanderers,  and  messages,  and  also as  an entrance            
  for fugitives escaping from Morgoth.                                      
    Thorndor  King  of   Eagles  removes   his  eyries   to  the            
  Northern  heights  of  the  encircling  mountains  and  guards            
  them  against  Orc-spies.'  On the  rocky hill,  Amon Gwareth,            
  the hill of watching, whose sides they  polish to  the smooth-            
  ness of glass, and  whose top  they level,  the great  city of            
  Gondolin with gates of steel is built. The plain all  about is            
  levelled as flat and smooth as a lawn of clipped grass  to the            
  feet of the hills, so that nothing can creep over it unawares.            
  The  people  of  Gondolin  grows  mighty, and  their armouries            
  are  filled with  weapons. But  Turgon does  not march  to the            
  aid  of  Nargothrond,  or  Doriath, and  after the  slaying of            
  Dior  he  has  no  more  to   do  with   the  son   of  Feanor            
  (Maglor).' Finally he closes  the vale  to all  fugitives, and            
  forbids the  folk of  Gondolin to  leave the  valley. Gondolin            
  is  the only  stronghold of  the Elves  left. Morgoth  has not            
  forgotten Turgon, but his  search is  in vain.  Nargothrond is            
  destroyed;  Doriath  desolate;  Hurin's  children   dead;  and            
  only scattered and fugitive Elves, Gnomes and  Ilkorins, left,            
  except  such  as  work  in  the  smithies  and mines  in great            
  numbers. His triumph is nearly complete.                                  
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
  1. Added  here  roughly  in pencil:  The hill  nearest to  Angband was 
     guarded by Fingolfin's cairn (cf. note 2).                             
  2. Added here at the same time as the addition given in note 1: sitting 
     upon Fingolfin's cairn.                                                
  3. the son of Feanor (Maglor) >  the sons  of Feanor  (this goes  with the 
     change at the end of $14, note 4).                                     

 

         
                                                              
                              16.                              
                                                              
  Meglin son of Eol  and Isfin  sister of  Turgon was  sent by 
 his mother to  Gondolin, and  there received,'  although half 
 of Ilkorin blood, and treated as a prince.                     
  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor.  The son  of Huor 
 was  Tuor,  younger than  Turin' son  of Hurin.  Rian, Huor's 
 wife,  sought  her  husband's  body  among  the slain  on the 
 field of Unnumbered Tears,  and died  there. Her  son remain- 
 ing  in  Hithlum  fell into  the hands  of the  faithless men 
 whom Morgoth  drove into  Hithlum after  that battle,  and he 
 was made a thrall. Growing wild  and rough  he fled  into the 
 woods, and  became an  outlaw, and  a solitary,  living alone 
 and  communing  with  none  save  rarely  with  wandering and 
 hidden Elves. On  a time  Ylmir contrived  that he  should be 
 led  to a  subterranean river-course  leading out  of Mithrim 
 into a chasmed  river that  flowed at  last into  the Western 
 Sea.  In  this way  his going  was unmarked  by Man,  Orc, or 
 spy,  and  unknown  of  Morgoth.  After long  wanderings down 
 the  western  shores  he came  to the  mouths of  Sirion, and 
 there  fell  in  with the  Gnome Bronweg,  who had  once been 
 in Gondolin. They journey secretly  up Sirion  together. Tuor 
 lingers long in the sweet  land Nan  Tathrin 'Valley  of Wil- 
 lows', but there Ylmir himself  comes up  the river  to visit 
 him, and tells him of his mission. He is  to bid  Turgon pre- 
 pare  for  battle against  Morgoth; for  Ylmir will  turn the 
 hearts  of  the  Valar to  forgive the  Gnomes and  send them 
 succour. If Turgon will do this, the battle will be terrible, 
 but the race of Orcs will perish and will not in after ages 


27 

 trouble Elves and Men. If not, the people of Gondolin are 
 to prepare for flight to Sirion's mouth, where Ylmir will aid 
 them to build a fleet and guide them back to Valinor. If 
 Turgon does Ylmir's will Tuor is to abide a while in      
 Gondolin and then go back to Hithlum with a force of      
 Gnomes and draw Men once more into alliance with the      
 Elves, for 'without Men the Elves shall not prevail against 
 the Orcs and Balrogs'. This Ylmir does because he knows 

 

 that ere seven'  full years  are passed  the doom  of Gondolin 
 will come through Meglin.(4)                                   
   Tuor  and  Bronweg  reach  the  secret  way,(5) and come out 
 upon  the  guarded  plain.  Taken  captive  by the  watch they 
 are  led  before  Turgon.  Turgon  is  grown  old'   and  very 
 mighty  and  proud, and  Gondolin so  fair and  beautiful, and 
 its people so proud of it and confident in its secret  and im- 
 pregnable strength, that the king  and most  of the  people do 
 not wish to  trouble about  the Gnomes  and Elves  without, or 
 care  for  Men,  nor  do  they  long  any  more  for  Valinor. 
 Meglin  approving, the  king rejects  Tuor's message  in spite 
 of  the  words  of  Idril the  far-sighted (also  called Idril 
 Silverfoot,  because she  loved to  walk barefoot)  his daugh- 
 ter,  and  the  wiser  of  his counsellors.  Tuor lives  on in 
 Gondolin,  and becomes  a great  chieftain. After  three years 
 he  weds  Idril -  Tuor and  Beren alone  of all  mortals ever 
 wedded  Elves,  and  since  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior Beren's 
 son  wedded  Earendel  son  of  Tuor and  Idril of  them alone 
 has come the strain of Elfinesse into mortal blood.           
   Not  long  after  this  Meglin  going  far  afield  over the 
 mountains  is  taken  by  Orcs,  and  purchases his  life when 
 taken  to  Angband  by  revealing  Gondolin  and  its secrets. 
 Morgoth  promises  him  the  lordship  of  Gondolin,  and pos- 
 session of Idril. Lust  for Idril  led him  the easier  to his 
 treachery, and added to his hatred of Tuor.                   
   Morgoth  sends  him  back  to  Gondolin.  Earendel  is born, 
 having  the  beauty  and  light and  wisdom of  Elfinesse, the 
 hardihood and strength  of Men,  and the  longing for  the sea 
 which  captured  Tuor  and  held  him  for  ever   when  Ylmir 
 spoke to him in the Land of Willows.                          
   At  last  Morgoth  is  ready,  and  the  attack  is  made on 
 Gondolin  with dragons,  Balrogs, and  Orcs. After  a dreadful 
 fight about the  walls the  city is  stormed, and  Turgon per- 
 ishes with many of the  most noble  in the  last fight  in the 
 great  square. Tuor  rescues Idril  and Earendel  from Meglin, 
 and hurls him  from the  battlements. He  then leads  the rem- 
 nant of the  people of  Gondolin down  a secret  tunnel previ- 
 ously  made  by  Idril's  advice  which comes  out far  in the 

 

 North  of  the  plain.  Those  who would  not come  with him                  
 but fled to the old way of escape are  caught by  the dragon                  
 sent by Morgoth to watch that exit.                                           
   In the fume  of the  burning Tuor  leads his  company into                  
 the  mountains  into  the  cold  pass of  Cristhorn (Eagles'                  
 Cleft). There they are ambushed, but saved by the  valour of                  
 Glorfindel  (chief  of  the  house of  the Golden  Flower of                  
 Gondolin, who dies in  a duel  with a  Balrog upon  a pinna-                  
 cle) and the intervention of  Thorndor. The  remnant reaches                  
 Sirion and journeys to the land at its mouth - the Waters of                  
 Sirion. Morgoth's triumph is now complete.                                    
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
 [All the changes in this section except that given in note 3 were late alter- 
 ations made roughly. and hastily.]                                            
                                                                              
 1 Added against this sentence: last of the fugitives from without             
 2 younger than Turin > cousin of Turin                                       
 3 seven early changed to twelve.                                               
 4 Added here: if they sit still in their halls.                               


28 

 5 Added here: which they find by the grace of Ylmir.                            
 6 The  word  old  circled  for removal.                                      
                                                                              
                                      17.                                      
                                                                              
   To Sirion's mouth Elwing daughter of  Dior comes,  and is                   
 received  by  the  survivors of  Gondolin.' These  become a                   
 seafaring folk, building many boats and  living far  out on                   
 the delta, whither the Orcs dare not come.                                    
   Ylmir  reproaches  the  Valar, and  bids them  rescue the                   
 remnants of the Noldoli  and the  Silmarils in  which alone                   
 now lives the light of the old days of bliss when the Trees                   
 were shining.                                                                 
   The  sons of  the Valar  led by  Fionwe Tulcas'  son lead                   
 forth a host, in which all the  Qendi march,  but remember-                   
 ing Swanhaven few of the Teleri  go with  them. Cor  is de-                   
 serted.                                                                       
   Tuor growing old' cannot forbear the call of the sea, and                   
 builds Earame and sails West with Idril and is heard  of no                   

 

  more.  Earendel  weds  Elwing.  The  call of  the sea  is born 
  also in him. He builds Wingelot and wishes  to sail  in search 
  of his father. Ylmir bids him to sail to Valinor.' Here follow 
  the marvellous adventures of Wingelot in  the seas  and isles, 
  and  of  how  Earendel  slew  Ungoliant in  the South.  He re- 
  turned  home  and  found  the Waters  of Sirion  desolate. The 
  sons  of Feanor  learning of  the dwelling  of Elwing  and the 
  Nauglafring  had  come  down  on  the  people of  Gondolin. In 
  a battle all the sons of Feanor save Maidros(4) were slain, but 
  the  last  folk  of Gondolin  destroyed or  forced to  go away 
  and  join  the people  of Maidros.'  Elwing cast  the Nauglaf- 
  ring into the sea and leapt after it,' but was changed  into a 
  white sea-bird by Ylmir,  and flew  to seek  Earendel, seeking 
  about all the shores of the world.                             
    Their  son (Elrond)  who is  half-mortal and  half-elfin,' a 
  child,  was  saved however  by Maidros.  When later  the Elves 
  return to  the West,  bound by  his mortal  half he  elects to 
  stay on earth.  Through him  the blood  of Hurin'  (his great- 
  uncle) and of  the Elves  is yet  among Men,  and is  seen yet 
  in valour and in beauty and in poetry.                         
    Earendel  learning  of  these   things  from   Bronweg,  who 
  dwelt in a hut, a solitary, at the mouth  of Sirion,  is over- 
  come  with  sorrow.  With  Bronweg  he  sets sail  in Wingelot 
  once more in search of Elwing and of Valinor.                  
    He comes to the  magic isles,  and to  the Lonely  Isle, and 
  at last to the Bay of Faerie. He climbs the  hill of  Cor, and 
  walks  in  the  deserted  ways  of Tun,  and his  raiment be- 
  comes  encrusted  with  the  dust of  diamonds and  of jewels. 
  He dares not go  further into  Valinor. He  builds a  tower on 
  an isle in the northern seas, to which all the seabirds of the 
  world repair. He sails  by the  aid of  their wings  even over 
  the airs  in search  of Elwing,  but is  scorched by  the Sun, 
  and hunted from  the sky  by the  Moon, and  for a  long while 
  he wanders the sky as a fugitive star.(9)                      
                                                                
                                *                                

 

                                     
                                                                           
 [In this section again most of the  changes (not  those in  notes 2  and 4) 
 were hastily made in pencil.]                                              
                                                                           
 1. This sentence was changed to read:                                       
                                                                           
       At Sirion's mouth Elwing daughter of Dior dwelt, and  received the 
       survivors of Gondolin.                                               
                                                                           
 2. growing old struck out.                                              
 3. Ylmir bids him to sail to Valinor struck out.                             


29 

 4. Maidros > Maidros and Maglor.                                        
 5. Written in the margin: Maglor sat and sang by the sea in repentance. 
 6. My  father  first  wrote  Elwing  cast  herself into  the sea  with the 
    Nauglafring, but changed it to Elwing cast the Nauglafring into the sea 
    and leapt after it in the act of writing.                              
 7. This sentence was changed to read:                                       
                                                                           
       Their  son  (Elrond) who is part  mortal and  part elfin  and part  of the 
       race of Valar,                                                       
                                                                           
     8 Hurin struck out, and  Huor and  of Beren  written above,  together with 
     some  illegible  words.  One  might  expect  Through  him  the   blood  of 
     Huor  and  of  Beren his  great-grandfathers, but  the illegible  words do 
     not  seem  to  be these.  (Hurin was  in fact Elrond's great-great-uncle.) 
     9 The last sentence (He sails by  the aid  of their  wings...) is  an addi- 
     tion, but I think an addition made at the time of writing.              
                                                                           
                                    18.                                     
                                                                           
   The march of Fionwe into the North is  then told,  and of                
 the Terrible or Last Battle. The Balrogs are all destroyed,                
 and  the  Orcs  destroyed  or  scattered.  Morgoth  himself                
 makes a last sally with all his dragons;  but they  are de-                
 stroyed,  all save  two which  escape, by  the sons  of the                
 Valar, and Morgoth is  overthrown and  bound' and  his iron                
 crown is made into a collar for his neck. The two Silmarils                
 are rescued. The Northern  and Western  parts of  the world                
 are rent and broken in the struggle.'                                      
   The  Gods  and  Elves  release  Men  from   Hithlum,  and                
 march  through  the  lands  summoning  the remnants  of the                
 Gnomes  and Ilkorins  to join  them. All  do so  except the                
 people  of  Maidros.  Maidros aided  by many  men' prepares                
 to perform his  oath, though  now at  last weighed  down by                

 

                                                                        
                                                                             
 sorrow because of  it. He  sends to  Fionwe reminding  him of                
 the oath and begging for the  Silmarils. Fionwe  replies that                
 he has lost his right to them  because of  the evil  deeds of                
 Feanor, and of the slaying of Dior, and of the  plundering of                
 Sirion.  He  must  submit,  and  come  back  to  Valinor;  in                
 Valinor only and at the judgement of the  Gods shall  they be                
 handed over.                                                                 
   Maidros  and  Maglor'  submit.  The  Elves  set  sail  from                
 Luthien (Britain or England) for  Valinor.' Thence  they ever                
 still from time [to time] set sail leaving the world ere they                
 fade.                                                                        
   On the last  march Maglor  says to  Maidros that  there are                
 two sons of Feanor now left, and two  Silmarils; one  is his.                
 He steals it, and flies, but it burns him so that he knows he                
 no longer has  a right  to it.  He wanders  in pain  over the                
 earth, and casts himself into a pit.' One Silmaril is  now in                
 the sea, and one in the earth.'                                              
   The  Gnomes  and  many  of  the  Ilkorins  and  Teleri  and                
 Qendi repeople the  Lonely Isle.  Some go  back to  live upon                
 the shores of Faery and in  Valinor, but  Cor and  Tur remain                
 desolate.                                                                    
                                                                             
                                      *                                       
                                                                             
 1. Added here: by the chain Angainor                                       
 2. Added here: and the fashion of their lands altered (late pencilled ad- 
    dition).                                                                  
 3. aided by many men struck out.                                              
 4. and Maglor circled in pencil.                                           
 5. This sentence was changed to read:                                         
                                                                             
          The Elves march to the Western shore, and begin to set sail from 
       Leithien (Britain or England) for Valinor.                             


30 

                                                                             
 6. casts himself into a pit > casts it into a fiery pit.                       
 7. Added here: Maglor sings now ever in sorrow by the sea.                    
                                                                             
                                     19.                                      
                                                                             
   The judgement of the Gods takes place. The earth is to                     
 be for Men, and the Elves who do not set sail for the                        

 

                                                          
                                                              
 Lonely  Isle  or  Valinor shall  slowly fade  and fail.  For a 
 while the last dragons and  Orcs shall  grieve the  earth, but 
 in the end all shall perish by the valour of Men.             
   Morgoth  is  thrust  through  the  Door  of  Night  into the 
 outer dark  beyond the  Walls of  the World,  and a  guard set 
 for ever on that Door. The lies  that he  sowed in  the hearts 
 of Men and Elves do not  die and  cannot all  be slain  by the 
 Gods,  but  live  on  and bring  much evil  even to  this day. 
 Some  say  also  that  secretly  Morgoth  or his  black shadow 
 and spirit in spite of the  Valar creeps  back over  the Walls 
 of  the  World in  the North  and East  and visits  the world, 
 others that this is Thu his great chief  who escaped  the Last 
 Battle and dwells still in  dark places,  and perverts  Men to 
 his  dreadful  worship.  When  the  world  is much  older, and 
 the  Gods  weary,  Morgoth  will come  back through  the Door, 
 and the last battle of all will be  fought. Fionwe  will fight 
 Morgoth  on  the  plain of  Valinor, and  the spirit  of Turin 
 shall be  beside him;  it shall  be Turin  who with  his black 
 sword  will  slay  Morgoth,  and  thus  the children  of Hurin 
 shall be avenged.                                             
   In  those  days the  Silmarils shall  be recovered  from sea 
 and  earth  and  air,  and  Maidros   shall  break   them  and 
 Belaurin(1) with  their fire  rekindle the  Two Trees,  and the 
 great  light  shall  come  forth again,  and the  Mountains of 
 Valinor shall be levelled so that it goes out over  the world, 
 and  Gods  and  Elves  and  Men' shall  grow young  again, and 
 all their dead awake.'                                        
   And thus it was that the  last Silmaril  came into  the air. 
 The  Gods  adjudged  the  last Silmaril  to Earendel  - 'until 
 many things  shall come  to pass'  - because  of the  deeds of 
 the sons of Feanor. Maidros is sent to  Earendel and  with the 
 aid of the Silmaril Elwing is  found and  restored. Earendel's 
 boat is drawn  over Valinor  to the  Outer Seas,  and Earendel 
 launches  it  into  the  outer  darkness  high  above  Sun and 
 Moon.  There  he  sails with  the Silmaril  upon his  brow and 
 Elwing at his side, the brightest of all stars,  keeping watch 
 upon Morgoth.4 So he shall sail until he sees the  last battle 
 gathering upon the plains  of Valinor.  Then he  will descend. 

 

   And this is the last end of the  tales of  the days  before the         
 days,  in  the  Northern  regions  of  the  Western  World. These         
 tales  are  some  of  those  remembered  and  sung by  the fading         
 Elves,  and  most  by  the  vanished  Elves  of the  Lonely Isle.         
 They  have  been  told   by  Elves   to  Men   of  the   race  of         
 Earendel,  and  most  to  Eriol  who  alone  of mortals  of later         
 days  sailed  to  the  Lonely   Isle,  and   yet  came   back  to         
 Luthien,'  and  remembered  things  he  had  heard  in Cortirion,         
 the town of the Elves in Tol Eressea.                                     
                                                                          
                                     *                                     
                                                                          
 1 Against Belaurin was written Palurien (cf. $1 note 1).                  
 2 and Men struck out.                                                     
 3 Added here:                                                             
                                                                          
       But of Men in that last Day the prophecy speaks not, save of Turin 
       only.                                                               
                                                                          


31 

 4 Added here: and the Door of Night (late pencilled addition).            
 5 Luthien > Leithien (cf. $18 note 5).                                   
                                                                          
                               Commentary on                               
                       the 'Sketch of the Mythology'.                      
                                                                          
   While  the  'Sketch'  is  a  good  and  clear  manuscript,  as  it  had 
 to  be  (since  it  was  to  be  read  by  R.  W.  Reynolds), it  will be 
 apparent  that  my  father  composed  it   extremely  rapidly:   I  think 
 it  quite  possible  and  even   probable  that   he  wrote   it  without 
 consulting the earlier prose tales.                                       
   Very   great   advances   have   been   made   towards   the   form  of 
 the  story  as  it  appears  in  the  published  work;  but  there  is no 
 trace  of  a  prose  narrative  even  in  fragmentary  or note  form that 
 bridges  the  gap  between  the  Lost  Tales  and  this  synopsis  in the 
 'Valinorean'  part  of  the  mythology  (i.e.  to   the  flight   of  the 
 Noldoli  and  the  making  of  the  Sun  and  Moon).   This  is   not  to 
 say,  of  course,  that  none  such  ever existed,  though the  fact that 
 my  father   did  undoubtedly   preserve  a   very  high   proportion  of 
 all  that  he  ever  wrote  leads me  to doubt  it. I  think it  far more 

 

  likely  that while  working on  other things  (during his  time at 
  Leeds)   he   had   developed   his   ideas,  especially   on  the 
  'Valinorean' part, without setting  them to  paper; and  since the 
  prose  Tales  had  been  set aside  a good  many years  before, it 
  may be that certain narrative  shifts found  in the  'Sketch' were 
  less fully intended, less conscious, than such shifts in the later 
  development  of  'The  Silmarillion',  where  he always  worked on 
  the basis of existing writings.                                    
    It is in any case  often extremely difficult, or  impossible, to 
  judge whether features in the Tales  that are  not present  in the 
  'Sketch'  were  omitted  simply  for the  sake of  compression, or 
  whether  they   had  been   definitively  abandoned.   Thus  while 
  Eriol - not AElfwine, see II. 300 - is mentioned  at the  end, and 
  his  coming  to Kortirion  in Tol  Eressea, there  is no  trace of 
  the Cottage of Lost Play:  the entire  narrative framework  of the 
  Lost  Tales  has  disappeared.  But  this  does  not by  any means 
  demonstrate that my father had actually rejected it at  this time. 
                                                                    
    The Commentary that follows is divided according to the          
  19 sections into which I have divided the narrative.               
    The 'Sketch of the Mythology' is referred to throughout          
  the rest of this book by the abbreviation 'S'.                     
                                                                    
    S  (the  'Sketch'),  which  makes no  reference to  the Creation 
  and  the  Music  of  the  Ainur,  begins  with  the coming  of the 
  Nine  Valar  'for  the governance  of the  world': the  Nine Valar 
  have been referred to in the alliterative poem  The Flight  of the 
  Noldoli  (see III.  133, 137).  There now  appears the isle (later 
  called  Almaren)  on  which  the  Gods dwelt  after the  making of 
  the  Lamps, the  origin of  which is  probably to  be seen  in the 
  tale of The Coming of the Valar I. 69 - 70, where it is  said that 
  when  the  Lamps  fell  the  Valar  were  gathered  on  the Twilit 
  Isles,  and  that  'that  island  whereon  stood  the  Valar'  was 
  dragged  westward  by  Osse.  It  might  seem  that  the  story of 
  Melko's making the pillars  of the  Lamps out  of ice  that melted 
  had  been  abandoned,  but  it  reappears  again  later,   in  the 
  Ambarkanta (p. 292).                                               
    The use of the word  'plant' of  the Two  Trees is  curious, and 

 

 

                                                                     
 might  be  dismissed  simply  as a  hasty expression  if it  did not 
 appear  in  the  following  version   of  'The   Silmarillion',  the 
 Quenta  (p. 80).  In the  old tale,  as in  the published  work, the 
 Trees   rose   from  the   ground  under   the  chanted   spells  of 
 Yavanna.  The  silver  undersides of  the leaves  of the  White Tree 
 now  appear,  and  its  flowers are  likened to  those of  a cherry: 
 Silpion  is  translated  'Cherry-moon'  in  the  Name-list   to  The 


32 

 Fall of  Gondolin (II.  215). The  mention of  the White  Tree first 
 may  imply  that it  had now  become the  Elder Tree,  as it  is ex- 
 plicitly in the Quenta.                                              
     As S was first written the  Trees had  periods of  twelve hours, 
 as in the  Lost Tales  (see 1.  88 and  footnote), but  with emenda- 
 tion  from  'six'  to  'seven'  (allowing for  the time  of 'mingled 
 light')  the  period  becomes  fourteen  hours.  This  was  a  move- 
 ment  towards  the   formulation  in   The  Silmarillion   (p.  38), 
 where  each  Tree  'waxed  to  full  and waned  again to  naught' in 
 seven  hours;  but in  The Silmarillion  'each day  of the  Valar in 
 Aman  contained   twelve  hours',   whereas  in   S  each   day  was 
 double that length.                                                  
     The  Gnomish  name of  Varda, Bridhil,  occurs in  the allitera- 
 tive  Flight  of  the  Noldoli  (changed  to  Bredhil),  the  Lay of 
 Leithian,  and  the   early  Gnomish   dictionary  (I.   273,  entry 
 Varda).   On   Timbrenting,   Tindbrenting   see   III.   127,  139; 
 Tengwethil  (varying  with  Taingwethil)  is  found  in  the  Lay of 
 the  Children  of  Hurin.  For  Ifan  Belaurin  see  I.  273,  entry 
 Yavanna;  in  the  Gnomish  dictionary  the  Gnomish  form  is Ifon, 
 Ivon.                                                                
                                                                     
                                  2.                                  
                                                                     
     The  description  in S  of the  'Outer Lands'  (now used  of the 
 Great  Lands,  see  III.  224),  where  growth  was  checked  at the 
 downfall  of  the  Lamps,  but  where  there  are  forests  of  dark 
 trees  in  which  Orome  goes  hunting  at  times, moves  the narra- 
 tive at this point in one step to its structure in The Silmarillion; 
 of the very  different account  in the  Lost Tales  I noticed  in my 
 commentary  on  The  Chaining  of  Melko (I.  111): 'In  this earli- 
 est  narrative  there  is  no  mention  of  the beginning  of growth 
 during  the  time  when  the Lamps  shone, and  the first  trees and 

 

  low plants appeared under Yavanna's spells  in the  twilight after 
  their overthrow.'                                                 
    Whereas  in  the  Lost  Tales  the  star-making  of  Varda  took 
  place  after  the  awakening  of  the  Elves  (I. 113),  here they 
  awake 'at the making of the stars.'                               
    In commenting  on the  Lost Tales  I noticed  g. 111,  131) that 
  the  Gods  sought  out  Melko  on  account  of his  renewed cosmic 
  violence,  before  the  awakening  of  the  Elves and  without re- 
  spect  to them  in any  way; and  that the  release of  Melko from 
  Mandos  took  place  before the  coming of  the Eldar  to Valinor, 
  so  that  he played  a part  in the  debate concerning  their sum- 
  mons. In S the later story (that  the discovery  of the  Elves led 
  directly to the assault of the Valar on  the fortress  of Morgoth) 
  is already present, and moreover a motive is  ascribed to  the in- 
  tervention of the  Valar that  is not  found in  The Silmarillion: 
  they are 'reminded of  their duty  to the  Earth, since  they came 
  thither knowing that their  office was  to govern  it for  the two 
  races  of Earth  who should  after come  each in  appointed time'. 
  It seems clear also that the old story of the coming of  the Elves 
  being  known  to  Manwe  independently   of  their   discovery  by 
  Orome (see L 131) had been abandoned.                             
    In  the  Lost  Tales  Melko's  first  fortress  was  Utumna, and 
  though  it was  not wholly  destroyed to  its foundations  g. 104) 
  after  his  escape back  into the  Great Lands  he was  'busy mak- 
  ing  himself  new   dwellings',  as   Sorontur  told   Manwe,  for 
  'never  more  will  Utumna  open  unto him'  g. 176).  This second 
  fortress  was  Angband  (Angamandi).  In  S,  on  the  other hand, 
  the first fortress  is Angband,  and after  his escape  Morgoth is 
  able to return to it ($4), for it was too strong  for the  Gods to 
  destroy   ($2).  The   name  Utumna   (Utumno)  has   thus  disap- 
  peared.                                                           
    In the passage describing the three  hosts of  the Elves  on the 
  great  march  from  Cuivienen  (which  occurs,  by  emendation, in 
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin, III. 18,  23) there  appears the 
  later use of Teleri for the third kindred  (who however  still re- 
  tain  the  old name  Solosimpi, the  Shoreland Pipers),  while the 


33 

  first  kindred  (the  Teleri of  the Lost  Tales) now  acquire the 
  name  Quendi  (subsequently  spelt  in S  both Quendi  and Qendi). 
  Thus:                                                             

 

                                               
                                                                     
           Lost Tales.    'Sketch'.              The Silmarillion. 
             Teleri.      Q(u)endi.                  Vanyar.          
                                                                     
           Noldoli.             Noldoli.             Noldor.          
                                                                     
         Solosimpi.     Teleri, Solosimpi.            Teleri.         
                                                                     
  The  formulation  at  the  time  of  the Lost  Tales was  that Qendi 
  was  the  original  name  of  all  the  Elves,  and  Eldar  the name 
  given  by  the  Gods  and  adopted  by the  Elves of  Valinor; those 
  who  remained  in  the  Great  Lands (Ilkorins)  preserved  the  old 
  name,  Qendi.  There  also  appear  now  the   terms  'Light-elves', 
  'Deep-elves', and  'Sea-elves' (as  in The  Hobbit, chapter  8); the 
  meaning  of 'the  Elves proper',  applied to  the first  kindred, is 
  clear  from  the  Quenta   (p.  102):   'the  Quendi...   who  some- 
  times are alone called Elves.'                                      
    Inwe  of  the  Lost Tales  now  becomes  Ingwe,  with  the  Gnom- 
  ish  equivalent  Ing  which  appears in  the alliterative  poems, as 
  does  Gnomish  Finn  (in  The  Flight  of  the Noldoli). Elwe (Elu) 
  is in the role of the later Olwe, leader of the third  kindred after 
  the loss of  Thingol. In  the Tale  of Tinuviel  Tinwelint (Thingol) 
  was indeed originally called Tinto Ellu  or Ellu,  but in  the tales 
  of  The  Coming  of  the  Elves  and  The Theft  of Melko,  by later 
  changes,  Ellu  becomes  the  name  of  the   second  lord   of  the 
  Solosimpi chosen in Tinwelint's place.                              
    Notably  absent  from  the  account  in S  are the  initial coming 
  of  the  three  Elvish  ambassadors  to Valinor,  and the  Elves who 
  did   not   leave   the   Waters  of   Awakening,  referred   to  in 
  Gilfanon's  Tale g.  231): the  Ilkorins are  here defined  as those 
  who  were  lost  on  the  great  march  into  the  West.   On  these 
  omissions see the commentary on $2 in the Quenta, p. 201.           
    Other  omissions  in  S  are  the  two  starmakings of  Varda (see 
  p.   201)   and   the   chain  Angainor   with  which   Morgoth  was 
  bound (see S $18 note 1).                                           
                                                                     
                                   3.                                 
                                                                     
    In the tale of The Coming of the Elves the island on which        
  the Gods were drawn to the western lands at the time of the         
  fall  of  the  Lamps  was  the island  on which  the Elves  were af- 

 

  terwards ferried, becoming Tol Eressea (see I. 118, 134); now, 
  the isle on which the Gods dwelt (see the commentary on $1)           
  is again the isle of the Elves' ferrying. But in The Silmarillion     
  there is no connection between the Isle of Almaren and Tol 
  Eressea.                                                              
    In the story of the ferrying features of the final narrative        
  emerge in S: the first two kindreds to arrive at the shores of        
  the sea are ferried together on this island, not separately as in     
  the tale; and the love of the sea among the Teleri (Solosimpi) 
  began during their waiting for Ulmo's return. On the other            
  hand the old story of Osse s rebellious anchoring of Tol              
  Eressea still survives (see I. 134); but the position of the island 
  after its anchoring has now shifted westwards, to the Bay of 
  Faerie, 'whence the Mountains of Valinor could dimly be               
  seen': contrast the account in the tale, where Ulmo had tra-          
  versed 'less than half the distance' across the Great Sea when        
  Osse waylaid it, and where 'no land may be seen for man               
  leagues' sail from its cliffs' (see I. 120 - 1, and my discussion 
  of this change, I. 134). In the tale, Osse seized and anchored        
  Tol Eressea before its journey was done because he 'deemed            
  himself slighted that his aid was not sought in the ferrying of 
  the Elves, but his own island taken unasked' g. 119); in S his      


34 

  jealousy is indeed mentioned, but also his love of the singing        
  of the Teleri, which was afterwards a prominent motive. Osse's     
  making of the seabirds for the Teleri (Solosimpi) was retained,       
  though afterwards lost.                                               
    In the tale the gap in the Mountains of Valinor was not             
  made by the Valor for the sake of the Elves, nor was the hill         
  of Kor raised for them: they had existed since distant days,          
  when 'in the trouble of the ancient seas a shadowy arm of wa-         
  ter had groped in toward Valinor' g. 122). In the passage in S  
  can be seen the origin of that in The Silmarillion (p. 59). Here 
  in S Cor is the hill and Tun is the city built upon it (though        
  in $2 there is a reference to Elves dwelling 'in Cor'); see           
  III. 93.                                                              
    On the 'invention' of gems by the Noldoli see I. 138. The           
  especial love of Mandos 'the wise' for the Noldoli is found           
  neither in the Lost Tales nor in The Silmarillion, and may seem       
  an improbable attribute of that Vala: cf. The Coming of the           

 

  Elves, I.  117: Mandos  and Fui  were cold  to the  Eldar as  to all 
  else.'                                                               
    The  passage  concerning  the  Noldorin  princes,  added   to  the 
  text of S (though probably after no great  interval), is  the origin 
  of  the  passage in  The Silmarillion  (p. 60)  which begins  in the 
  same  way:  'The  Noldor  afterwards  came  back   to  Middle-earth, 
  and this tale tells  mostly of  their deeds...'  For the  details of 
  names  and relations  in this  passage see  the Note  at the  end of 
  this section of the commentary.                                      
    The  story  of  the coming  of the  Teleri (Solosimpi)  to Valinor 
  from Tol Eressea  comes  in S,  in essentials,  almost to  the form 
  in The Silmarillion (p. 61); for the very  different account  in the 
  tale  see I.  124-6. In  S, however,  it was  Ylmir (Ulmo)  not Osse 
  who  taught  them  the  craft  of shipbuilding,  and this  of course 
  reflects the difference still underlying: for here Ylmir  was still, 
  as  in  the  tale,  eager  for the  coming of  the Third  Kindred to 
  Valinor,  whereas  in  The  Silmarillion   he  had   himself  bidden 
  Osse  make  fast  the  island  to  the  sea-bottom,  and  afterwards 
  only  'submitted  to  the will  of the  Valar'. -  The name  Ylmir - 
  almost  certainly  the  Gnomish  form -  appears in  the Lay  of the 
  Children  of  Hurin,  see III.  93; but  the form  Oin for  Uinen is 
  not found elsewhere.                                                 
                                                                      
                      Note on the Noldorin princes.                    
                                                                      
    Fingolfin  as  the  son  of  Finwe  (Finn)  and  father  of Turgon 
  emerges  first  in  the  Lay of  the Fall  of Gondolin  (II. 146-7), 
  and is present  in the  second version  of the  Lay of  the Children 
  of  Hurin  (only  by  emendation  in  the  first) (III. 137).  That 
  Feanor  was  Fingolfin's  brother  is  deducible  from  the  allitera- 
  tive Flight of the Noldoli (ibid.), but from S, as  originally writ- 
  ten in this section, it is seen that Feanor was at first the second, 
  not  the  elder  son.  Here  in  S  Finwe's  third son  Finrod first 
  emerges: the mention of  him, and  his sons,  in a  note to  the Lay 
  of  the Children  of Hurin (III. 80)  is certainly  later, as  is his 
  first appearance in the Lay of Leithian (III. 191, 195).              
    The  seven  sons  of  Feanor  with  the  same  name-forms  as here 
  in S have appeared  in the  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin (III. 65, 

 

                                                            
                                                                   
 86);  the  naming  of  Damrod  and Diriel  together in  S suggests 
 that they were already twin brothers.                              
   Of  the  sons of  Fingolfin Turgon  of course  goes back  to the 
 Lost Tales,  where  he  was the  son, not  the grandson,  of Finwe 
 the other son Finweg appears in the Lay of the Children            
 Hurin, where the emendation to Fingon  (see III.  5, 80)  is later 
 than S - and  the Quenta,  where he  was still  Finweg in  the text 
 as first written.                                                  
   The  sons  of  Finrod  first  emerge here,  and as  the inserted 
 passage in S  was first  written Orodreth  was apparently  the el- 


35 

 dest   son;  Angrod   was  Anrod;   and  Felagund   was  Felagoth. 
 Felagoth occurs as an intervening stage between Celegorm an        
 Felagund in the A-text  of the  Lay of  Leithian (III.  169, 195). 
                                                                   
                                 4.                                 
                                                                   
   In this section again S moves at a step  close to  the essential 
 structure of the narrative in The Silmarillion, though  these are 
 important features not  yet present.  I have  discussed previously 
 g. 156-8) the radical differences  between the  tale of  The Theft 
 of Melko and the story in The  Silmarillion, and  it will  be seen 
 that  it was  with S  that almost  all these  differences entered: 
 there is thus no  need to  repeat the  comparison again  here. But 
 various more minor matters may be noticed.                         
   The  quarrel  of the  Noldorin princes  has as  yet none  of the 
 complexity and subtlety that entered into  it afterwards  with the 
 history of Miriel, the first wife of Finwe  and mother  of Feanor, 
 the quarrel is in any case treated with great brevity.              
   It is said here  that 'Feanor  has cursed  for ever  anyone, God 
 or  Elf  or  mortal that  shall come  hereafter, who  touches [the 
 Silmarils]'. In $5, by a later interpolation, the oath is taken by 
 Feanor  and  his sons  at the  time of  the torchlit  concourse in 
 Tun,  but  the  statement  in  $4  my  father  allowed  to  stand, 
 clearly  because he  overlooked it.  In the  alliterative fragment 
 The  Flight  of  the  NoLdoli, however,  which on  general grounds 
 I assume to belong to  the earlier  part of  1925 (III.  131), the 
 oath is sworn by Feanor and his  sons as  in the  interpolation in 
 S  $5,  'in  the  mighty  square  upon  the  crown  of  Cor'  (see 
 III. 136). I incline to  think that  the statement  here in  $4 was 
 a slip of memory.                                                  

 

    The  events  immediately  following  the  council  of   the  Gods 
  in  which  Morgoth's  lies  were  disclosed  and   Feanor  banished 
  from  Tun  (in S  the banishment  is not  said to  be limited  to a 
  term  of  years)  are  not  yet  given  the form  they have  in The 
  Silmarillion.  The  entire  story  of  Morgoth's going  to Formenos 
  (not  yet  so  named)  and  his  speech  with  Feanor   before  the 
  doors (The Silmarillion pp. 71 -  2) has  yet to  appear. Morgoth's 
  northward movement up  the coast  in feint  is also  absent; rather 
  he  comes  at  once  to Arvalin  'where the  shadow is  thickest in 
  all the world', as is said in The Silmarillion (p. 73) of Avathar. 
    In  the  story  of  Morgoth's  encounter  with Ungoliant  and the 
  destruction of the Trees details  of the  final version  appear, as 
  Ungoliant's   ascent  of   the  great   mountain  (later   '  named 
  Hyarmentir)  'from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle',  and  the  ladder made 
  for Morgoth to climb. There is  no mention  of the  great festival, 
  but it appears in 55: it looks as if my  father omitted  to include 
  it earlier and brought it in a bit further on as an afterthought. 
    In  the  tale  of  The  Theft  of  Melko  Ungoliant   fled  south 
  at  once  after  the  destruction  of  the Trees  (I. 154),  and of 
  Melko's  subsequent  movements  after  his  crossing  of   the  Ice 
  it  is  only  told  (by  Sorontur  to  Manwe, I.  176) that  he was 
  busy  building  himself  a  new  dwelling-place  in  the  region of 
  the  Iron  Mountains. But  in S  the story  of 'the  Thieves' Quar- 
  rel'  and  Morgoth's  rescue  by   the  Balrogs   emerges  suddenly 
  fully-formed.                                                      
                                                                    
                                   5.                                
                                                                    
    From  the  account  of  the  great  festival  (see  commentary on 
  54)  is  absent  both the  original occasion  for holding  it (com- 
  memoration  of  the coming  of the  Eldar to  Valinor, I.  143) and 
  that  given  in  The  Silmarillion  (the  autumn feast:  pp. 74-5). 
  The later feature  that the  Teleri were  not present  appears (see 
  I 157); but there  is no  suggestion of  the important  elements of 
  Feanor  coming  alone  to  the festival  from Formenos,  the formal 
  reconciliation  with  Fingolfin, and  Feanor's refusal  to surrender 
  the Silmarils before he  heard the  news of  his father's  death and 
  the theft of the jewels (The Silmarillion pp. 75, 78 - 9).           


36 

    In  the later  emendations of  the text  of S  we see  the growth 
  of  the  story  of  the divided  counsels of  the Gnomes,  with the 

 

  introduction of the attempt  of Finrod  (later Finarfin)  to calm 
  the conflicting  factions -  though this  element was  present in 
  the tale  of  The  Flight  of  the  Noldoli, where  Finwe No1eme 
  plays the part  of the  appeaser g.  162). After  a good  deal of 
  further shifting in this passage in later texts, and the introduc- 
  tion of Galadriel, the alignment, and the motives, of the princes 
  as  they  appear  in  The  Silmarillion  are  more  complex  (pp. 
  83-4); but the element  is  already  present  that  only  one of 
  Finrod's   sons   sided   with   him   (here  Felagund,   in  The 
  Silmarillion Orodreth).                                           
    The  emendation  making  Fingolfin  and  Finweg  (Fingon)  rule 
  over 'a half of the  Noldoli of  Tun' must  be incorrect;  my fa- 
  ther probably  intended  the  revised  text  to  read   'over  the 
  Noldoli of Tun'.                                                  
    The rapid shifting in the  part of  Finrod (Finarfin)  in these 
  events  can  be  observed in  the successive  interpolations made 
  in S. It seems that in the original text he did not appear at all 
  (the first mention of him is in the  interpolated passage  in $3, 
  pp. 15 - 16). He is said not to have left Tun; then he is said to 
  have been slain at Swanhaven; and finally it is told that  he and 
  his sons were not at Swanhaven, but left Tun  reluctantly, carry- 
  ing  with  them  many  things  of their  making. Finrod  was then 
  introduced as only arriving with his people in the far  North af- 
  ter the burning of the ships by the Feanorians on the  other side 
  of the strait. As  S was  originally written  Fingolfin, deserted 
  and  shipless, returned  to Valinor,  and it  was his  son Finweg 
  (Fingon) who led the main host  over the  Grinding Ice;  but with 
  the  introduction  of  Finrod  he becomes  the one  who returned. 
  (Finweg  as  the  leader  of  the  host was  not then  changed to 
  Fingolfin, but this was obviously an oversight.)                  
    In the account of the  northward journey  of the  Noldoli after 
  the  battle  of  Swanhaven  it seems  that all  the host  was em- 
  barked in the ships of the Teleri,  since Mandos'  emissary hails 
  them from a high cliff 'as they sail  by', but  this may be merely 
  due  to  compression,  since  in  the Tale  g. 166)  some marched 
  along the shore while 'the fleet coasted beside them not  far out 
  to sea', and the same is told in The Silmarillion ('some  by ship 
  and some by land', p.  87). -The  storm raised  by Uinen  is not 
  mentioned.                                                        

 

    It  is  curious  that  the  curse  upon  the  Gnomes,  that they 
  should  suffer  from  treachery  and the  fear of  treachery among 
  their  own  kindred,  is  separated from  the Prophecy  of Mandos; 
  but it  is not  said by  whom this  curse was  pronounced. Nothing 
  is told in S as originally written of the content of  the Prophecy 
  of Mandos, save that it concerned  'the fate  of after  days', but 
  my father subsequently added  that it  told of  'the curse  of war 
  against  one  another  because  of  Swanhaven', thus  bringing the 
  'curse'  into   the  content   of  the   'Prophecy',  as   in  The 
  Silmarillion. There is no trace of  the old  prophecies concerning 
  Turgon  and  Gondolin  g.  167,  172),  but nor  is there any sug- 
  gestion of the nature of the doom of  the Noldor  as it  is stated 
  in The Silmarillion.                                               
    For the original story of the  crossing of  the Grinding  Ice by 
  the  Gnomes,  where  there  is  no  element  of  treachery (though 
  the blaming of Feanor was already present), see I. 167 - 9.        
                                                                    
                                  6                                  
                                                                    
    The  making  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  is  here  compressed  into 
  a couple of phrases. Virtually all of the extremely  elaborate ac- 
  count in the old Tale  of the  Sun and  Moon has  disappeared: the 
  tears of Vana leading to the last fruit  of Laurelin,  the breaking 
  of the 'Fruit  of Noon',  the Bath  of the  Setting Sun  where the 
  Sun-maiden  and  her  ship  were  drawn  on  coming  out   of  the 
  East, the song of Lorien leading  to the  last flower  of Silpion, 


37 

  the  fall  of  the  'Rose  of Silpion'  which caused  the markings 
  on  the Moon,  the refusal  to allow  Silmo to  steer the  ship of 
  the Moon and the task  given instead  to Ilinsor, a spirit  of the 
  Suruli,  Lake Irtinsa where the  ship of  the Moon  was refreshed, 
  and  much else.  But while  it is  impossible to  say how  much of 
  all this my father had 'privately' rejected at  this time  (see my 
  remarks,  I.  200),  some  elements at  least were  suppressed for 
  the purposes of this 'Sketch', which is after all only an outline, 
  for they will reappear.                                            
    The change in  the celestial  plan now  takes place  because the 
  Gods 'find it safer to  send [the  Sun and  Moon] in  Ylmir's care 
  through  the  caverns  and  grottoes beneath  the Earth'.  This is 
  wholly different from the old story (I. 215),  in which  the orig- 
  inal  plan  of  the  Gods  was  that  the Sun  and Moon  should be 

 

  drawn  beneath  the  earth;  this  plan  was  changed   when  they 
  found  that  the  Sun-ship  'might  not  safely  come  beneath the 
  world'  -  the  very  reverse  of what  is said  in S.  Though the 
  Moon  continued  to  pass  beneath  the earth,  the Gods  now made 
  the  Door  of  Night  in the  West and  the Gates  of Morn  in the 
  East,  through  which  the  Sun  passed thenceforward,  going into 
  and returning  from  the  Outer  Dark  g.  216).  The astronomical 
  aspect  of  the  mythology  has thus  undergone a  profound shift, 
  an entire re-making.                                               
    The  reference  to  the  rekindling  of  the  'Magic  Sun' (here 
  with extension to the Moon,  not found  in the  earliest writings) 
  is a noteworthy survival; and  the meaning  is explicitly  the re- 
  birth  of  the  Trees  (see  II. 286).  Very remarkable  is Ulmo's 
  foretelling to the Valar that the rekindling of the Two  Trees and 
  the return of  'the bliss  and glory  of old'  would only  come to 
  pass by the aid of Men. It is possible that this is a reference to 
  his  own  deep designs  laid through  Turgon, Tuor,  and Earendel; 
  but  it is  nowhere suggested  that these  designs issued  or were 
  intended  to  issue  in  such a  way. Perhaps  we should  see here 
  rather  the continued  existence in  some form  of the  old proph- 
  ecy given in II. 285:                                              
                                                                    
    The  Elves'  prophecy  is  that  one  day  they  will  fare  forth 
    from Tol  Eressea and  on arriving  in the  world will  gather all 
    their  fading  kindred  who  still  live  in  the world  and march 
    towards  Valinor...  This  they  will  only  do  with the  help of 
    Men.   If   Men   aid  them,   the  fairies   will  take   Men  to 
    Valinor  -  those  that wish  to go  - fight  a great  battle with 
    Melko  in  Erumani   and  open   Valinor.  Laurelin   and  Silpion 
    will  be  rekindled,  and  the   mountain  wall   being  destroyed 
    then  soft  radiance  will  spread  over  all  the world,  and the 
    Sun and Moon will be recalled.                                   
                                                                    
    In  the  account  of the  Hiding of  Valinor we  move in  S from 
  the Lost Tales to The Silmarillion: I have  observed (I.  223) the 
  total  absence in  the latter  of the  bitter divisions  among the 
  Valar,  of  Manwe's  disgusted withdrawal,  of Ulmo's  vain plead- 
  ing for pity on the Noldor - and of my  father's explicit  view in 
  the tale of The Hiding of Valinor  that the  actions of  the Valar 

 

  at  this  time,  and  their failure  to make  war upon  Morgoth, were 
  a  profound  error  arising  from  indolence and  fear. The  fear of 
  Morgoth  does  indeed  remain,  and  is the  only motive  offered in 
  The  Silmarillion  for  the  Hiding  of  Valinor,  but   the  author 
  makes  no  comment  on  it.  In  S  however  the  element  of divine 
  anger  against  the Noldoli  is still  present (though  neither here 
  nor  later  is there  any reference  to the  peculiar anger  of Aule 
  against  them  (see  I.  176), save  that in  the Annals  of Valinor 
  (p.  317) when  Finrod and  others returned  to Valinor  after hear- 
  ing  the  Doom  of  Mandos  'Aule  their  ancient  friend  smiled on 
  them no more').                                                      
                                                                      
    There  are  differences  and  omissions in  the later  versions of 
  the story of the Hiding of Valinor in relation to  that in  the tale 


38 

  which  have been  sufficiently discussed  already g.  223 -  4); but 
  it may be noticed  that in  S no  reason is  given for  keeping open 
  the  pass  of  Kor,  neither  that  in  the  tale  nor  that  in The 
  Silmarillion.                                                        
                                                                      
    It  is  very clear  that with  the 'Sketch'  the structure  of the 
  Valinorean  part  of  the mythology,  though not  of course  the de- 
  tail,  had quite  largely reached  the stage  of development  of the 
  published  version;  and  it  can  be   understood  why   my  father 
  wrote   on   the   envelope   containing   S   the   words  Original 
  'Silmarillion'. It is here that 'The Silmarillion' begins.           
                                                                      
                                   7.                                  
                                                                      
    It will be  seen that  in this  passage S  has already  the struc- 
  ture  and  some even  of the  phrases of  the last  three paragraphs 
  of chapter 12 ('Of Men') in The Silmarillion.                        
    The  Feanorian  oath  (ascribed  here  to  the  sons only)  is em- 
  bodied in the text  as written,  which probably  shows that  the in- 
  terpolated  passage,  introducing  the  oath,  in  $5  (p.  20)  was 
  inserted while S was still in process of composition.                
    The  words  of  S,  'in  the  early  days  Eldar  and Men  were of 
  nearly  equal  stature  and  power  of  body',  are  echoed  in  The 
  Silmarillion:  'Elves  and  Men  were of  like stature  and strength 
  of  body', for  statements on  this matter  in earlier  writings see 
  II. 326.                                                             

 

    The  'higher culture'  that my  father came  to ascribe  to the 
  Elves  of  Doriath  (or   more  widely   to  the   Grey-elves  of 
  Beleriand)  is  now established  ('Only in  the realm  of Doriath 
  ... did the Ilkorins equal the Koreldar'); contrast  the descrip- 
  tion of the Ilkorins of Tinwelint's following in the old  Tale of 
  Tinuviel ('eerie they were and strange beings, knowing  little of 
  light or loveliness or of musics...'),  concerning which  I noted 
  that Tinwelint's people are there  described in  terms applicable 
  rather to the wild Avari  of The  Silmarillion (see  H. 9,  64). It 
  is however said in this passage of the  tale that  'Different in- 
  deed did they become when the Sun arose.*                         
    The  ideas  expressed  here  concerning the  nature of  the im- 
  mortality of the Elves go back largely to the Lost Tales; cf. the 
  description of  the hall  of Mandos  in The  Coming of  the Valar 
  (I. 76):                                                          
                                                                   
    Thither  in  after  days  fared the  Elves of  all the  clans who 
    were  by  illhap  slain  with  weapons  or did  die of  grief for 
    those that were  slain -  and only  so might  the Eldar  die, and 
    then  it  was  only  for  a  while.   Them  Mandos   spake  their 
    doom,  and  there  they  waited  in  the  darkness,  dreaming  of 
    their  past  deeds,  until such  time as  he appointed  when they 
    might  again  be  born  into  their  children,  and  go  forth to 
    laugh and sing again.                                           
                                                                   
  Similarly in The Music of the Ainur g. 59) it  is said  that 'the 
  Eldar dwell till the Great End unless they be  slain or  waste in 
  grief (for to both of these deaths are they subject)', and 'dying 
  they are reborn in their children, so that their  number minishes 
  not, nor grows'. But in the early texts death by sickness  is not 
  mentioned, and this appears  for the  first time  in S:  where by 
  emendation  there  is a  modification of  the idea,  from freedom 
  from all  sickness to  freedom from  death by  sickness. Moreover 
  in the early texts rebirth in their own children seems to be rep- 
  resented as the universal fate of the Eldar  who die;  whereas in 
  S they are said to return from Mandos 'to free life'.  Rebirth is 
  mentioned in S very briefly and only in a later interpolation. 
    In S  my father's  conception of  the fate  of Men  after death 
  is  seen  evolving  (for  the extremely  puzzling account  in the 

 

  Lost Tales see I.  77, 90-3).  As he  first wrote S, there  was an 
  explicit assertion that Men  did not  go to  Mandos, did  not pass 


39 

  to the western land: this was  an idea  derived from  contact with 
  the Eldar.  But he  changed this,  and wrote  instead that  Men do 
  indeed go to  their own  halls in  Mandos, for  a time;  none know 
  whither they go after, save Mandos himself.                        
    On  the  'fading'  of  the  Elves  who  remained 'in  the world' 
  see II. 326.                                                       
                                                                    
                                  8.                                 
                                                                    
    Neither  the  brief  outlines   for  what   was  to   have  been 
  Gilfanon's  tale of  The Travail  of the  Noldoli (I.  237-41) nor 
  the  subsequent  abandoned  narrative  given  on  pp.  5 -  7 bear 
  much  relation  to  what  came after.  Enduring features  were the 
  camp  by  Asgon-Mithrim,  the  death of  Feanor, the  first affray 
  with  the  Orcs,  the capture  and maiming  of Maidros;  but these 
  elements had different  motivations and  concomitants in  the ear- 
  liest writing, already discussed g. 242 -  3). With  the 'Sketch', 
  however, most of the essentials of the  later story  appear fully- 
  formed, and the  distance travelled  from the  Lost Tales  is here 
  even more striking than hitherto.                                  
                                                                    
    The first battle of  the Gnomes  with the  forces of  Morgoth is 
  not clearly placed in S (cf. Gilfanon's Tale,  I. 238,  240, where 
  the battle was fought 'in the foothills of the Iron  Mountains' or 
  in 'the pass of the Bitter Hills') - but the idea is already pres- 
  ent that the Orcs were aroused by  the burning  of the  ships (cf. 
  55: 'The same light also tells the Orcs of the landing'.)          
    There  now  emerge  the  death   of  Feanor   at  the   hand  of 
  Gothmog  the  Balrog,  the parley  with the  enemy and  the faith- 
  less intentions on both sides, the arrival of the second host, un- 
  furling their blue and silver banners (see p.  8) under  the first 
  Sunrise, and the dismay of  the Orcs  at the  new light,  the hos- 
  tile  armies  of  the Gnomes  encamped on  opposite sides  of Lake 
  Mithrim,  the  'vast  smokes  and  vapours'  rising  from Angband. 
  The only important structural  element in  the narrative  that has 
  yet  to appear  is that  of Fingolfin's  march to  Angband immedi- 
  ately on arrival  in Middle-earth  and his  beating on  the doors. 

 

    The earlier existence  of the  story of  the rescue  of Maidros 
  by Finweg (Fingon) is implied by a  reference in  the Lay  of the 
  Children of Hurin (see III. 65, 86) - that in the Lay of Leithian 
  is some two years later than S (HI. 222). A curious  point arises 
  in the account in S: it seems that it was  only at  this juncture 
  that Manwe brought into  being the  race of  Eagles. In  the tale 
  of  The Theft  of Melko  Sorontur (the  'Elvish' form  of Gnomish 
  Thorndor) had already played a part in the  story before  the de- 
  parture of the Noldoli from Valinor. he was  the emissary  of the 
  Valar to Melko before the destruction of  the Trees,  and because 
  Melko tried to slay the Eagle                                     
                                                                   
    between  that evil  one and  Sorontur has  there ever  since been 
    hate  and  war,  and  that  was  most  bitter  when  Sorontur and 
    his  folk fared  to the  Iron Mountains  and there  abode, watch- 
    ing all that' Melko did g. 149).                                
                                                                   
    It  may  be  noted  that  Lake Mithrim  is placed  in Hisilome/ 
   Hithlum/Dorlomin; see III. 103.                                  
                                                                   
                                  9.                                
                                                                   
    For this section of the narrative the earliest materials are so 
  scanty that we may almost say that the 'Sketch' is  the starting- 
  point. In an outline for Gilfanon's Tale g. 238) there is mention 
  of a meeting between  Gnomes and  Ilkorins, and  it was  with the 
  guidance  of  these  Ilkorins  that  Maidros   led  an   army  to 
  Angamandi,   whence   they  were   driven  back   with  slaughter 
  leaving  Maidros  a  captive;  and this  was followed  by Melko's 
  southward  advance  and  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears.  As I 
  have noted (I. 242):                                              


40 

                                                                   
    The  entire  later  history  of the  long years  of the  Siege of 
    Angband,  ending  with   the  Battle   of  Sudden   Flame  (Dagor 
    Bragollach),  of  the  passage  of  Men  over the  Mountains into 
    Beleriand  and  their  taking  service  with the  Noldorin Kings, 
    had  yet  to  emerge; indeed  these outlines  give the  effect of 
    only  a   brief  time   elapsing  between   the  coming   of  the 
    Noldoli from Kor and their great defeat.                        

 

  In another  outline (I.  240) there  is a  slight suggestion  of a 
  longer period, in the  reference to  the Noldoli  'practising many 
  arts'. In this outline the  meeting of  Gnomes and  Ilkorins takes 
  place at 'the  Feast of  Reunion' (where  Men were  also present). 
  But beyond this there is really nothing of the  later story  to be 
  found  in  these  projections.  Nor  indeed  had  S (as originally 
  written)   made   any  very   remarkable  advances.   Men 'already 
  dwelt in the woods of the North',  which is  sufficiently strange, 
  since according to  S Men  awoke at  the first  rising of  the Sun 
  ($6),  when  also  Fingolfin marched  into Middle-earth  ($8), and 
  far  too  little time  had elapsed,  one would  think, for  Men to 
  have  journeyed  out  of  'the  far East'  ($6) and  become estab- 
  lished in  'the woods  of the  North'. Moreover  there is  no sug- 
  gestion (even  allowing for  the brief  and concentrated nature of 
  the  'Sketch')  that  the  Leaguer  of  Angband  lasted  any great 
  length of time, nor is  the breaking  of the  Leaguer particularly 
  characterised:  Morgoth  'sends  out  his  armies',   and  'Gnomes 
  and Ilkorins and Men are scattered', that is  all. But  the break- 
  ing  of  the Leaguer  was already seen as  a turning-point  in the 
  history of the Elves of Beleriand. It  is perfectly  possible that 
  much  of  the  new  material  that  appears at  this place  in the 
  Quenta (see  pp. 125  ff.) was  already in  my father's  mind when 
  he wrote S (i.e., S was  a precis,  but a  precis of  an unwritten 
  story); for instance, the  blasting of  the great  grassy northern 
  plain  in  the  battle that  ended the  siege (not  even mentioned 
  in  S)  was  already  present  when  the  Lay  of  She Children of 
  Hurin was written (III. 55).                                        
    With the later interpolations in S enters the idea of  the Siege 
  of Angband as  an epoch,  'a time  of growth  and birth  and flow- 
  ering',  and  also the  disposition of  the Gnomish  princes, with 
  the essentials of the later history already present - Fingolfin in 
  Hithlum,  the  Feanorians  in  the  East  (where  they  afterwards 
  warred  with  Dwarves,  Orcs,  and  Men),  and  Felagund  guarding 
  the entry into the lands of Sirion.  (The reference  to Broseliand 
  in this passage is  noteworthy: the  form of  the name  spelt with 
  -s-  first  appears  in  the  A-text  of  Canto IV  of the  Lay of 
  Leithian  -  probably early  1928; III.  195, 197).  'Fingolfin is 
  slain  when  Morgoth  breaks  the  leaguer' may  or may  not imply 
  the story of his duel with Morgoth before Angband.                 

 

    Gumlin  father  of  Hurin  has  appeared  in  the  second version 
  of  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin (III.  115, 126);  but Huor, 
  named  as  Hurin's brother  in the  rewriting of  S, here  makes his 
  first appearance in the legends.                                     
    The  complexities  of  the history  of Barahir  and Beren  and the 
  founding  of  Nargothrond  are  best  discussed  together  with what 
  is said in 510; see the commentary on the next section.              
                                                                      
                                   10.                                 
                                                                      
  In $9  as first  written Barahir  already appears  as the  father of 
  Beren,  replacing  Egnor;  and  they  are  here Ilkorin  Elves,  not 
  Men,  though  this  was  changed  when  the  passage   was  revised. 
  In  the first  version of  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin Beren 
  was still  an Elf,  while in  the second  version my  father shifted 
  back  and  forth  between  Man  and  Elf (III. 124-5); in  the open- 
  ing cantos of the A-text of  the Lay  of Leithian  (in being  by the 
  autumn  of  1925)  Egnor  and  his  son  were  Men (III.  171);  now 
  here  in  S  (early  1926) they  are again  Elves, though  Egnor has 
  become  Barahir.  Perplexingly,  in  $10  as  first  written,  while 


41 

  Barahir  is  'a  famous chieftain  of Ilkorindi',  on the  same page 
  of  the  manuscript  and quite  certainly written  at the  same time 
  Beren  'alone  of  mortals  came  back  from  Mandos'.  It  may well 
  be  that  the  statements  in   S  that   Barahir  and   Beren  were 
  Ilkorins were an  inadvertent return  to the  former idea,  after the 
  decision  that  they  were Men  (seen in  the A-text  of the  Lay of 
  Leithian) had  been made.  (Later in  the original  text of  S, $14, 
  Beren is a mortal.)                                                  
    The  reference   in  $9  to  the   founding  of   Nargothrond  by 
  Celegorm  and  Curufin  and  in  $10  to  Barahir  having   been  'a 
  friend  of  Celegorm  of Nargothrond'  belong to  the phase  of the 
  swiftly-evolving  legend represented  by  alterations  to the  text of 
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 83-5),  when it was 
  Celegorm   and   Curufin   who   founded   Nargothrond   after   the 
  breaking of the Leaguer  of  Angband  and   Felagund  had   not  yet 
  emerged; similarly in the A-text of  the Lay of Leithian (III. 171), 
  The  alterations  to  S  in  these  sections  move  the story  on to 
  the  form  found  in  the  B-text  of  the  Lay  of  Leithian,  with 
  Felagund  as  the  one  saved   by  Barahir   and  the   founder  of 
  Nargothrond  -  though here  it is  said specifically  that Felagund 

 

             
                                                                    
 and his brothers  founded  the realm,  with  the  aid  of  Celegorm 
 and  Curufin;  it  seems therefore  that the  deaths of  Angrod and 
 Egnor  in  the battle  that ended  the Leaguer  had not  yet arisen 
 (see III. 221, 247).                                                
  The very early  form of  the story  of Beren  (the first  stage of 
 development from the Tale of Tinuviel)  in S  $10 as  first written 
 has been discussed in III. 219 - 20, 244.  There remains  an inter- 
 esting point to mention in the  end of  this version:  the sentence 
 'Some  songs  say  that Luthien  went even  over the  Grinding Ice, 
 aided  by  the  power  of  her  divine  mother, Melian,  to Mandos' 
 halls  and  won  him  back.'  There  is  no  suggestion   hem  that 
 Luthien herself died at  the time  of Beren's  death; and  the same 
 idea seems likely to underlie the  lines of  the second  version of 
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 107):                         
                                                                    
                 ere he winged afar                                  
    to the long awaiting; thence Luthien won him,                    
    the Elf-maiden, and the arts of Melian...                        
                                                                    
 In the Tale of Tinuviel, on the other hand, it is said (II. 40) that 
                                                                    
  Tinuviel   crushed  with   sorrow  and   finding  no   comfort  or 
  light  in  all  the  world  followed him  swiftly down  those dark 
  ways that all must tread alone                                     
                                                                    
 - and this seems quite clear in its meaning.                        
  Beren  and  Luthien  are here  said to  have lived,  after Beren's 
 return,  'in  the  woods  of  Doriath  and  in  the  Hunters' Wold, 
 west  of  Nargothrond'.  The  Land  of  the  Dead  that   Live  was 
 placed  in  the Hunters'  Wold (Hills  of the  Hunters) in  the Lay 
 of the  Children of  Hurin; see  III. 89,  where the  previous his- 
 tory of its placing is given.                                       
  That  Beren  and  Hurin  were   friends  and   fellows-in-arms  is 
 stated  in  the  Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, and  earlier (see 
 III. 25), but it has not  been said  before that  this relationship 
 arose during the time of Beren's outlawry.                          
  For  the  use  of  'Shadowy  Mountains'  to  mean   the  Mountains 
  of Terror see III. 170-1.                                         
  In the rewritten passage (p. 28) the story is  seen at  an earlier 

 

  stage than that in the  'Synopsis II'  for Cantos  VI and  VII of 
  the  Lay  of  Leithian  (1928),  the  text of  which is  given in 
  III.  221,  233.  Celegorm  has been  displaced by  Felagoth (not 
  yet  Felagund);  but  Celegorm  'discovered  what was  the secret 
  mission  of  Felagoth  and  Beren'  after  their  departure  from 
  Nargothrond,  and  thus  the  element  of  the   intervention  of 


42 

  Celegorm   and   Curufin,  turning   the  Elves   of  Nargothrond 
  against their king, was not yet present.  Moreover in  the north- 
  ward  journey  of  Beren  and  his  companions  from  Nargothrond 
  there is a  battle with  Orcs, from  which only  a small  band of 
  the Elves escapes, afterwards returning to the battlefield to de- 
  spoil the dead  and disguise  themselves as  Orcs. These  two el- 
  ements  are  clearly  interconnected:  Celegorm (and  Curufin) do 
  not  know  why  Beren  and  Felagoth  are  setting out,  and thus 
  there  is  no  reason  why  the king  should not  set out  with a 
  strong  force.  When  my  father  wrote  'Synopsis  II'   he  had 
  brought  in  the  element  of the  intervention of  the Feanorian 
  brothers  against  Felagund  and  Beren,  and  with it  the small 
  band that was all  they had  as companions  from their  first de- 
  parture from Nargothrond.                                         
    The sequence is thus clearly:  S -  Synopsis I  - interpolation 
  in S - Synopsis II; and in the revision of S here we have  an in- 
  teresting  stage  in  which  Felagund  (Felagoth) has  emerged as 
  the  lord of  Nargothrond, but  the 'Feanorian  intervention' has 
  not, and Celegorm still 'offers redress' to Luthien, as he did in 
  Synopsis I (III. 244) - for his dog Huan had hurt her.            
                                                                   
    The earliest form of this part  of the  story (apart  from that 
  which relates to  Hurin) is  extant only  in the  compressed out- 
  lines for Gilfanon's Tale. In my comparison  of those  early out- 
  lines with the narrative of The Silmarillion I  noted g.  242) as 
  essential features of the story that were to survive:             
                                                                   
  - A mighty battle called the Battle of Unnumbered Tears is        
  fought between Elves and Men and the hosts of Melko;              
  - Treachery of Men, corrupted by Melko, at that battle;           
  - But the people of Urin (Hurin) are faithful, and do not sur- 
  vive it;                                                          

 

                               
                                                                 
 - The leader of the Gnomes is isolated and slain;                
 - Turgon and his host cut their way out, and go to Gondolin; 
 - Melko is wrathful because he cannot discover where Turgon      
 has gone;                                                        
 - The Feanorians come late to the battle;                        
 - A great cairn is piled.                                        
                                                                 
 There is no evidence for any narrative of  the Battle  of Unnum- 
 bered Tears in its own right between the outlines for Gilfanon's 
 Tale and the 'Sketch',  thus $11  in S  shows at  a step  a very 
 great advance. This is not however  to be  regarded as  a direct 
 evolution from the  outlines, for  many elements  - such  as the 
 stories of Beren  and Tinuviel,  and of  Nargothrond -  had been 
 developed 'collaterally' in  the meantime.  As S  was originally 
 written  in  $11,  the  old  'pre-Felagund'  story  was  present 
 ('Curufin  and  Celegorm  despatch  a  host   from Nargothrond', 
 see commentary on $10), and  although the  failure of  the Union 
 of Maidros to gather together all the Elves of Beleriand  into a 
 united force already appears, the alignments were for  this rea- 
 son  quite  different:  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  (ruled  by 
 Celegorm  and  Curufin)  will not  serve under  Finweg (Fingon). 
 But with the rewriting  of S,  made after  the emergence  of the 
 Felagund-story,  an  essential  element  of the  later narrative 
 comes into being: Orodreth will not join  the league  on account 
 of Felagund his brother (cf. The Silmarillion p.  188: 'Orodreth 
 would not march forth at the word  of any  son of  Feanor, be- 
 cause  of  the  deeds  of Celegorm  and Curufin.')  That Thingol 
 sent few (emended from none) out of  Doriath is  a very  old el- 
 ement,  appearing  already  in  the  Tale  of Turambar (II. 73), 
 where Tinwelint said  to Mavwin,  in words  echoed in  the pres- 
 ent passage of S:                                                
                                                                 
  not for  love nor  for fear  of Melko  but of  the wisdom  of my 
  heart and the fate of the Valar  did I  not go  with my  folk to 


43 

  the  Battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears,  who   am  now   become  a 
  safety and a refuge...                                          
                                                                 
 A new factor in Thingol's policy now  appears, however,  in that 
 he resented  the 'haughty  words' addressed  to him  by Maidros, 

 

  demanding the  return of  the Silmaril  - those  'haughty words' 
  and  their  effect  on the  Union of  Maidros survived  into The 
  Silmarillion (p. 189). That Thingol here  allows 'the  Gnomes of 
  Doriath' to join the league is to be related to the statement in 
  S  59:  'Many  Gnomes  take  service  with  Thingol  and Melian' 
  (after the breaking of the Siege  of Angband).  (In the  Tale of 
  Tinuviel there were Noldoli in Tinwelint's service: it  was they 
  indeed who built the bridge before his doors. H. 9, 43.)         
    As  S  was  rewritten,  the  division  of  the   opponents  of 
  Morgoth  into  two  hosts  was  due  to   the  refusal   of  the 
  Feanorians  to  be  led  by  Finweg  (Fingon),  whereas  in  The 
  Silmarillion   account   there   was   good   agreement  between 
  Himring and Eithel Sirion, and  the assault  from East  and West 
  of the Feanorians and the Noldor of Hithlum  a matter  of strat- 
  egy  ('they  thought  to take  the might  of Morgoth  as between 
  anvil and hammer, and break it to pieces').                      
    The  Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears is  still in  S in  a simple 
  form,  but  the  advance of  the Elves  of Hithlum  into Dor-na- 
  Fauglith in pursuit of a  defeated Orc-army,  so that  they fall 
  prey  to  much   greater  hosts   loosed  from   Angband,  moves 
  towards the plan of the later narrative; the late arrival of the 
  Feanorians  goes  back to  an outline  for Gilfanon's  Tale (see 
  above).  No detail  is given  in S  concerning the  treachery of 
  Men at the battle, nor is any reason suggested for the late com- 
  ing of the Eastern Noldor.                                       
    Finweg  (Fingon)  had  taken  the place  of Finwe  (Noleme) as 
  the Gnomish king slain in the battle already in  the Lay  of the 
  Children of  Hurin (III. 86), and  so the  story of  the Scarlet 
  Heart, emblem of Turgon (I.  241, H.  172), had  disappeared; in 
  the second  version of  the Lay  there is  mention of  his white 
  banners... in blood beaten (III. 96). In S  Turgon is  a leader, 
  with his  brother Finweg  (Fingon), of  the Western  Noldor from 
  the outset, and  was clearly  conceived to  be dwelling  at this 
  time in Hithlum (cf. the interpolation in $9:  'Fingolfin's sons 
  Finweg and Turgon still hold out in the  North', i.e.  after the 
  ending of the Siege of Angband);  and the  discovery of  the se- 
  cret valley and the founding  of Gondolin  follows from  the re- 
  treat from the disaster of the Battle  of Unnumbered  Tears. The 
  'sacrifice of Mablon the Ilkorin' (I. 239, 241) has disappeared. 

 

    The  great  mound of  the slain  on Dor-na-Fauglith,  the first 
  trace of which appears in an outline for Gilfanon's Tale (I. 241, 
  243), had  been described  in the  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin 
  (III. 58-9), where Flinding said to Turin as  they passed  by it 
  in the moonlight:                                                 
                                                                   
         A! green that hill with grass fadeless                      
         where sleep the swords of seven kindreds...                
                                                                   
         neath moon nor sun is it mounted ever                      
         by Man nor Elf; not Morgoth's host                         
         ever dare for dread to delve therein.                      
                                                                   
    The story  of Hurin  at the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears  - his 
  holding  of  the  rearguard  with  his  men while  Turgon escaped 
  southwards, his capture, defiance of Morgoth,  and torture  - had 
  already been told in the Tale of Turambar (II.  70-1) and  in the 
  Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 23-4,  102). In  all these 
  sources  Morgoth's  concern  with Hurin,  his attempts  to seduce 
  him, and his great  rage when  defied, arise  from his  desire to 
  find Turgon; but the element is still of course lacking in S that 
  Hurin had  previously visited  Gondolin, which  at this  stage in 
  the development of the legend did not exist  as a  Noldorin fast- 


44 

  ness until after  the Battle.  As the  story evolved,  this fact, 
  known to  Morgoth, gave  still more  ugency to  his wish  to take 
  Hurin alive, and to use him against Turgon.                       
                                                                   
                                 12.                                
                                                                   
    It  is  immediately  obvious  that  S was  based on  the second 
  version of the Lay of the Children of Hurin, so far  as it  goes - 
  which in relation to the whole narrative is  not far:  no further 
  than the feast at which Turin  slew Orgof.  This is  already evi- 
  dent  from  the  preceding  portion  of  S,  describing Morgoth's 
  treatment of Hurin in Angband; while in  the present  section the 
  guardians  of  Turin  on the  journey to  Doriath bear  the later 
  names  Halog  and  Mailgond  (emended  in  the  Lay  to Mailrond, 
  III. 119), not Halog and Gumlin.                                
    It is not to be expected that the  synopsis of  the story  in S 
  should show any substantial alteration of that in the  first ver- 

 

  sion of the  Lay; there  is some  development nonetheless.  It is 
  now  explicit  that  the  Men who  in the  Lay dwelt  in Dorlomin 
  and  dealt  unkindly  with  Hurin's  wife,  and  of whom  I noted 
  (III. 24) that 'there is still no indication of who these men were 
  or  where  they  came  from', are  now explicitly  'faithless men 
  who  had  deserted  the  Eldar  in   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered 
  Tears',  penned  in  Hithlum  because  Morgoth  'desired  to keep 
  them  from  fellowship  with  Elves'.  The  question  of  whether 
  Nienor was born  before Turin  left Hithlum  is now  resolved: he 
  had never seen her. For the uncertainty on this point in  the Tale 
  of Turambar see  H. 131;  in the  Lay she  was born  before Turin 
  left (III. 9).                                                     
    Whereas  in the  Lay Beleg,  who was  not searching  for Turin 
  when  he  was  captured  by  the  outlaw  band,  knew  nothing of 
  what  had  happened  in  the Thousand  Caves (see  HI. 50),  in S 
  'Turin  released  Beleg,  and  is told  how Thingol  had forgiven 
  his deed long  ago'. Blodrin  is now  again the  son of  Ban, not 
  of Bor (see III. 52).                                             
    There is an interesting  note in  S that  Turin was  taken alive 
  to Angband 'for Morgoth  has begun  to fear  that he  will escape 
  his  curse  through  his  valour and  the protection  of Melian'. 
  This idea is seen  in the  words of  the Lay (III. 33) they haled 
  unhappy Hurin's offspring/lest he flee his  fate, and  goes back 
  to the Tale of Turambar (H. 76):                                  
                                                                   
    Turin  was  overborne  and  bound,  for  such  was  the  will  of 
    Melko  that  he  be brought  to him  alive; for  behold, dwelling 
    in  the  halls  of Linwe  [i.e. Tinwelint]  about which  had that 
    fay    Gwedheling    the    Queen    woven   'much    magic   and 
    mystery  ...  Turin  had  been  lost  out  of  his sight,  and he 
    feared lest he cheat the doom that was devised for him.         
                                                                   
    There is little else to note in this section beyond the new de- 
  tail  that  the Orcs feared  Taur-na-Fuin no  less than  Elves or 
  Men,  and  only went  that way  when in  haste, and  the ancestor 
  of  the  phrase  'Gwindor  saw  them   marching  away   over  the 
  steaming  sands  of  Anfauglith'  (The  Silmarillion  p.  208) in 
  'Flinding  sees  them marching  over the  steaming waste  of Dor- 
  na-Fauglith' (cf. the  Lay, III. 48: The  dusty dunes  of Dor-na- 

 

 Fauglith/hissed and spouted). A very great deal is of course      
 omitted in the synopsis.                                          
                                                                  
                                13.                                
                                                                  
   With the  second paragraph  of this  section, 'Turin  leads the 
 Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  forsake  their  secrecy  and  hidden 
 warfare', S reaches the point where  the Lay  of the  Children of 
 Hurin  stops,  and  certain   advances  made   on  the   Tale  of 
 Turambar  (II.  83  ff.)  can  be  observed.  The  re-forging  of 
 Beleg's  sword  for  Turin  in  Nargothrond  now appears.  In the 


45 

 Lay  Flinding  put  the  sword  in  the  hollow  of a  tree after 
 Beleg's death (III. 56); as I noted (III. 86):  'if the  poem had 
 gone  further  Turin  would  have  received  his  black  sword in 
 Nargothrond in gift  from Orodreth,  as happens  in the  Tale'. S 
 thus  shows  a  development from  the plot  implicit in  the Lay. 
 The bridging of Narog by  Turin's counsel  enters the  story only 
 as a pencilled marginal note. The extent of the victories and re- 
 conquest  of  territory  by  the  Gnomes  of Nargothrond  at this 
 time is  made explicit,  and the  realm is  much as  described in 
 The Silmarillion (p. 211):                                        
                                                                  
   The  servants  of Angband  were driven  out of  all the  land be- 
   tween   Narog   and   Sirion  eastward,   and  westward   to  the 
   Nenning and the desolate Falas                                  
                                                                  
 (where however  its northern  border along  the southern  feet of 
 the  Shadowy  Mountains  is  not  mentioned;  in  S  'their realm 
 reaches to the sources of Narog').                                
   The later addition to  the text  of S,  'even Glomund,  who was 
 at the Battle of Tears', is to be related to  the absence  of any 
 mention of the Dragon in S's account  of the  battle ($11).  As S 
 was  first  written,  the  Dragon  was  named  Glorung,  a change 
 from Glorund of the  Lost Tales;  the series  was thus  Glorund > 
 Glorung  >   Glomund  >   Glaurung.  In   the  Lay   of  Leithian 
 Glomund replaces Glorund (III. 208 - 9).                           
   The  sentence  'Flinding  wounded  refuses Turin's  succour and 
 dies reproaching him' shows the later  form of  the story,  as in 
 The Silmarillion pp. 212 - 13; for discussion of  the substantial 
 change from the Tale see II. 124. It is said in S that Turin for- 

 

 sook Finduilas 'against his heart  (which if  he had  obeyed his 
 uttermost fate would  not have  befallen him)',  and this  is no 
 doubt to be related to the passage in the Tale (II. 87):          
                                                                 
   And truly is it said: 'Forsake  not for  anything thy  friends - 
   nor  believe  those  who counsel  thee to  do so'  - for  of his 
   abandoning  of  Failivrin in  danger that  he himself  could see 
   came the very direst evil upon him and all he loved.           
                                                                 
 For discussion of this see II. 125.                              
   Of Turin's return to Hithlum there is little to note,  for the 
 synopsis is here very compressed; and  I have  earlier discussed 
 fully  the  relationship between  the Tale  and the  later story 
 (II. 126-7).  The  Woodmen  with  whom  Turin  lives  after  his 
 flight  from  Hithlum  are  now given  a more  definite location 
 'east of Narog' (see II. 140-1). In S it is made clear that Turin 
 did not join himself to a people already existing, but 'gathered 
 a new people'. This is in contradiction, strangely  enough, both 
 to  the  Tale (II. 91, 102), where they  had a  leader (Bethos) 
 when Turin joined them, and to the later story. Turin  now takes 
 the name Turambar at this point in the narrative, not as  in the 
 Tale  before  the  Dragon  outside  the  caves of  the Rodothlim 
 (II. 86, 125).                                                    
   Turning  now to  the expedition  from Doriath  to Nargothrond, 
 the  only  important  structural difference  from the  Tale that 
 emerges  in  the  brief  account  in S  is that  Morwen (Mavwin) 
 was  evidently  no  longer present  at the  conversation between 
 Nienor and the Dragon (II. 98-9, 129); on the other hand, it is 
 said at the end of this section that  'Some say  Morwen released 
 from  spell  by  Glorung's  death  came  that  way and  read the 
 stone.'                                                          
   When  Nienor-Niniel came  to the  falls of  the Silver  Bowl a 
 fit of shivering came on her, as in the later narrative, whereas 
 in  the Tale  it is  only said  that she  was filled  with dread 
 (II. 101, 130). Very notably, the statement that Niniel was with 
 child by Turambar was added to S later,  just as  it was  in the 
 Tale (see II. 117 note 25, 135).                                 
   In the foregoing I have only  picked out  points that  seem to 
 show quite clearly  a different  conception of  the events  in S 


46 

 

   
                                                                    
  from that in the Tale. I have not mentioned  the many  slight dif- 
  ferences  (including the  very many  omissions) that  are probably 
  or certainly due to compression.                                   
                                                                    
                                 14.                                 
                                                                    
    Of this section of the narrative there exists in  earlier writing 
  only the conclusion of the  Tale of  Turambar (II.  112 -  16) and 
  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring (II. 221ff.) in  which the  story is 
  continued.  The  opening  passage  of  S  follows  the end  of the 
  Tale  of  Turambar  in  Melko's  accusation  against   Thingol  of 
  faintheartedness,  Hurin's  embitterment  from  the  pondering  of 
  Melko's words,  the gathering  to him  of a  band of  outlaws, the 
  fear of  the spirit  of the  dead Dragon  that prevented  any from 
  plundering  Nargothrond,  the  presence  there  of   Mim,  Hurin's 
  reproaches  and the  casting of  the gold  at Thingol's  feet, and 
  Hurin's departure. The  words of  S concerning  the fate  of Hurin 
  derive  from  the  Tale,  where  however  he  died in  Hithlum and 
  it  was his  'shade' that  'fared into  the woods  seeking Mavwin, 
  and long those twain haunted the  woods about  the fall  of Silver 
  Bowl bewailing their children'.                                    
    From  this  point  the  source  for  S  (or  perhaps  more accu- 
  rately, the previous written form of the narrative) is the Tale of 
  the  Nauglafring. It  is here  impossible to  say for  certain how 
  much  of  the  complex  story  in the Tale had  by this  time been 
  abandoned.                                                         
    It  is  not  made  clear whether  Mim's presence  in Nargothrond 
  goes back to the time  of the  Dragon (see  II. 137),  nor whether 
  the outlaws of  Hurin's band were Men  or Elves  (in the  Tale the 
  text  was  emended  to  convert  them  from  Men  to  Elves);  and 
  there is  no indication  of how  the gold  was brought  to Doriath. 
  The outlaws disappear in  S after  the slaying  of Mim,  and there 
  is no suggestion of  the fighting  in the  Thousand Caves  that in 
  the Tale  led  to  the  mound  made  over   the  slain,   Cum  an- 
  Idrisaith, the Mound of Avarice.                                   
    The  next  part  of  the  Tale (Ufedhin  the renegade  Gnome and 
  the complex   dealings  of   Thingol  with   him  and   with  the 
  Dwarves of Nogrod, II. 223 - 9)  is reduced  to a  few lines  in S, 
  which  could  possibly  stand  as  an  extremely  abbreviated  ac- 
  count  of  the old  story, even  though Ufedhin  is here  not even 

 

  mentioned. The  making of  the Necklace  was not  in the  Tale, as 
  it is in S, part of the king's request: the idea of it  was indeed 
  hatched  by  Ufedhin  during  his  captivity  as  a lure  'for the 
  greater ensnaring of the king' (II. 226); but  this also  could be 
  set down to  compression. I  think it  is more  probable, however, 
  that my  father had  in fact  decided to  reduce and  simplify the 
  narrative, and that Ufedhin had been abandoned.                    
    The   problem   of  the   entry  of   the  Dwarvish   army  into 
  Doriath,  defended by  the Girdle  of Melian,  is still  solved by 
  the  device  -  the  too  simple device,  see II.  250 -  of 'some 
  treacherous  Gnomes'  (in the  Tale there  was only  one traitor); 
  the  slaying  of  Thingol  while  hunting remains,  and as  in the 
  Tale  Melian, inviolable,  left the  Thousand Caves  seeking Beren 
  and Luthien. Though it is not so stated, it  seems likely  that in 
  this version  it was  Melian who  brought the  news and  the warn- 
  ing to Beren (this is the  story in  the Quenta,  p. 160).  In the 
  Tale  it  was  Huan  who  brought  word  to  Beren and  Luthien of 
  the assault  on Artanor  and the  death of  Tinwelint, and  it was 
  Ufedhin,  fleeing  from  the  Dwarf-host  (after his  abortive at- 
  tempt to slay Naugladur and steal the  Nauglafring, and  his kill- 
  ing of Bodruith lord of  Belegost), who  revealed the  course that 
  the  Dwarves  were  taking  and  made possible  the ambush  at the 
  Stony  Ford;  but  Huan  has  in  S  been  slain in  the Wolf-hunt 
  ($10), and Ufedhin has (as I think) been eliminated.               
    The  ambush at  the ford  is made  by 'Beren  and the  brown and 


47 

  green  Elves  of the  wood', which  goes back  to 'the brown Elves 
  and the green', the 'elfin folk all clad in green and brown' ruled 
  by Beren and afterwards by  Dior in  Hithlum, in  the Tale  of the 
  Nauglafring. But of the vigorous account of the battle at the ford 
  in the Tale - the laughter of the Elves  at the  misshapen Dwarves 
  running with their long  white beards torn by  the wind,  the duel 
  of   Beren   and   Naugladur,   whose  forge-hammer   blows  would 
  have  overcome  Beren  had  not   Naugladur  stumbled   and  Beren 
  swung  him  off his  feet by  catching hold  of the  Nauglafring - 
  there is nothing in S: though equally,  nothing to  contradict the 
  old story. There  is however  no mention  of the  two Dwarf-lords, 
  Naugladur  of  Nogrod and  Bodruith of  Belegost, and  though both 
  Dwarf-cities are  named the  Dwarves are  treated as  an undivided 
  force, with, as it seems, one  king (slain  at the  ford): Thingol 

 

  summoned  those  of  Belegost  as  well  as  those  of  Nogrod  to 
  Doriath  for  the  fashioning  of  the gold,  whereas in  the Tale 
  (II. 230) the former only enter the story after the humiliating ex- 
  pulsion of the Dwarves of  Nogrod, in order to  aid them  in their 
  revenge. Of the old story  of the  death of  Bodruith and  the feud 
  and   slaughter  among   the  two   kindreds  (brought   about  by 
  Ufedhin) there is no trace.                                        
    The  drowning  of the  treasure in  the river  goes back  to the 
  Tale; but there however the  suggestion is  not that  the treasure 
  was deliberately sunk: rather it fell into the river with the bod- 
  ies of the Dwarves who bore it:                                    
                                                                    
    those that  waded in  the ford  cast their  golden burdens  in the 
    waters  and  sought  affrighted  to  either  bank,  but  many were 
    stricken with those pitiless darts and fell  with their  gold into 
    the currents (II. 237).                                           
                                                                    
 It is not said in  the Tale  that any  of the  gold was  drowned by 
 the Elves.  There, Gwendelin  came to  Beren and  Tinuviel after 
 the  battle of  the Stony  Ford, and  found Tinuviel  already wear- 
 ing the Nauglafring;  there is  mention of  the greatness  of her 
 beauty when  she wore  it. Gwendelin's  warning is  only against 
 the  Silmaril (the  rest of  the treasure  being drowned),  and in- 
 deed  her  horror at  seeing  the  Necklace   of  the   Dwarves  on 
 Tinuviel  was  so  great  that  Tinuviel  put  it  off. This  was to 
 Beren's  displeasure,  and  he kept  it (II.  239-40). In  S the 
 drowning  seems  to  be  carried  out   in  response   to  Melian's 
 warning of the curse upon it, and the story  seems to  be thus: 
 Melian comes  to Beren  and Luthien  and warns  them of  the ap- 
 proach of  the Dwarf-host  returning out  of Doriath;  after the 
 battle  Luthien  wears  the   Nauglafring  and   becomes  immeasur- 
 ably beautiful; but Melian warns them of the  curse on  the gold 
 and  on the  Silmaril and  they drown  the treasure,  though Beren 
 keeps the Necklace secretly.                                    
    The  fading  of  Luthien  follows  immediately on  the statement 
 that the  Necklace was  kept, but  no connection  is made.  In the 
 Tale such a connection is explicit: the  doom of  mortality that 
 Mandos had spoken fell swiftly -                                    

 

  and  in  this perhaps  did the  curse of  Mim have  [?potency] in 
  that it came more soon upon them (II. 240).                        
                                                                   
 Moreover  in  a  synopsis  for  a projected  revision of  the Lost 
 Tales  it  is  said  that  the  Nauglafring  'brought  sickness to 
 Tinuviel' (II. 246).                                               
  The reference to the  fading of  Luthien in  S retains  the words 
 of the Tale: Tinuviel  slowly faded  'even as  the Elves  of later 
 days have done', and, again  as in  the Tale,  Luthien 'vanished'. 
 In the Tale Beren was an Elf,  and it  is said  of him  that after 
 searching all Hithlum and Artanor for  Tinuviel in  terrible lone- 
 liness 'he too faded from life'. In my discussion  of this  I said 
 (II. 250):                                                          
                                                                   
  Since  this  fading  is here  quite explicitly  the mode  in which 


48 

  'that  doom  of  mortality  that  Mandos  had  spoken'  came  upon 
  them,  it  is  very notable  that it  is likened  to, and  even it 
  seems  identified with,  the fading  of 'the  Elves of  later days 
  throughout  the world'  - as  though in  the original  idea Elvish 
  fading was a form of mortality.                                   
                                                                   
 The passage in S, retaining this idea in  respect of  Luthien, but 
 now  with  the  later  conception  that  Beren  was a  mortal Man, 
 not an Elf, is changed in  that Beren  is no  longer said  to have 
 faded: he 'was lost', looking in vain for Luthien. It is also said 
 here  that  the  price  of  Beren's return  from Mandos  was 'that 
 Luthien  should  become as  shortlived as  Beren the  mortal', and 
 in $10, where the story of Beren and Luthien  is briefly  told, it 
 is  not  in  fact  said  that  Luthien  died  when  Beren  died in 
 Doriath  (see the  commentary on  that section,  p. 65).  There is 
 also  a  sentence  added to  the MS  in 510:  'But Mandos  in pay- 
 ment exacted that Luthien should become mortal as Beren.'          
  It is possible to conclude from this that,  in the  conception as 
 it  was  when  S  was  written,  Beren  died,  as  a  mortal dies; 
 Luthien  went to  Valinor as  a living  being; and  Mandos allowed 
 Beren  to  return to  a second  mortal span,  but Luthien  now be- 
 came subject to the same shortness of  span as  he. In  this sense 
 she  became  'mortal', but  being an  Elf she  'faded' -  this was 
 the manner of her death: as it was  also the  manner of  the death 

 

  of the fading Elves of later ages. Part of  the difficulty  in all 
  this  undoubtedly  lies  in  the  ambiguous  nature  of  the words 
  'mortal' and  'immortal' applied  to the  Elves: they  are 'immor- 
  tal', both in the sense that they need not die, it is not in their 
  essential nature to die,  'in the  world', and  also in  the sense 
  that, if they did, they did not 'leave the world',  did not  go to 
  'a fate  beyond the  world', and  they are  'mortal' in  that they 
  might  nonetheless  die  'in the  world' (by  wounds or  by grief, 
  but not from sickness or  age). Luthien  became 'mortal'  in that, 
  although an Elf, she must die - she must fade.                     
    It  may  be  noted  that  the  words  'as  Men  grew  strong and 
  took  the  goodness of  earth' derive  from the  Lay of  the Chil- 
  dren of Hurin (III. 44, 54):                                        
                                                                    
                        for in days long gone                        
      ... Men were of mould less mighty builded                      
      ere the earth's goodness from the Elves they drew.             
                                                                    
  Cf.  The Silmarillion,  p. 105:  'In after  days, when  because of 
  the  triumph  of  Morgoth  Elves  and  Men  became  estranged,  as 
  he most wished, those of the Elven-race that lived still in      
  Middle-earth  waned  and  faded,  and  Men usurped  the sunlight.' 
                                                                    
    Lastly, in the story of  Dior and  the ruin  of Doriath  as told 
  in  S,  there  are   various  developments.   The  son   of  Dior, 
  Auredhir  (II.  240)  has disappeared.  The 'vain  bargaining' be- 
  tween  Dior  and the  Sons of  Feanor perhaps  refers to  the pas- 
  sage  in  the  Tale  (II. 241)  where Dior asserts that  to return 
  the  Silmaril  the Nauglafring  must be  broken, and  Curufin (the 
  messenger  of  the  Feanorians)  retorts  that  in  that  case the 
  Nauglafring  must  be  given  to  them   unbroken.  In   the  Tale 
  Maglor,  Diriel, Celegorm,  and Cranthir  (or the  earlier equiva- 
  lents of their names) were killed in the battle (which  there took 
  place in Hithlum, where Dior ruled  after his  father); but  in S, 
  as first written, the story takes a very strange turn, in that the 
  Feanorians did get  their hands  on the  Nauglafring, but  then so 
  quarrelled over it that  in the  end 'only  Maglor was  left'. How 
  the story would have gone in  this case  is impossible  to discern. 

 

                             15 and 16.                            
                                                                  
   The  two  sections  describing  Gondolin and  its fall  are dis- 
 cussed together in the following commentary.                      
   At the  beginning of  $15 the  brief reference  to the  story of 


49 

 Isfin  and  Eol  shows  development  from what  was  said  in  the 
 Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin (III. 146): for  in the  poem Isfin 
 was seeking, together with  her mother,  for her  father Fingolfin 
 when  she  was entrapped  by Eol  in the  dark forest.  The larger 
 history has evolved since then, and now Isfin  'was lost  in Taur- 
 na-Fuin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears'.  We  can only 
 surmise  how  she  came  to  be  there.  Either she  left Gondolin 
 soon  after  its settlement  bent on  some purpose  unrecorded, or 
 else she was lost in the retreat from the battle. (It is, inciden- 
 tally, a curious aspect  of the  earlier conception  of Gondolin's 
 foundation  that there  were women  and children  to people  it as 
 well  as  warriors;  for one  would suppose  that Turgon  had left 
 the  old  men,  the  women,  and  the  childhen  of his  people in 
 Hithlum -  why should  he do  otherwise? But  in the  outlines for 
 Gilfanon's  Tale  them  are  references  to  Turgon's  having 'res- 
 cued  a  part  of the  women and  children', and  having 'gathered 
 women  and  children from the  camps'  as  he  fled   south  down 
 Sirion g. 239, 241).) Meglin is still,  as in  the poem,  'sent by 
 his mother to Gondolin', while she remained with her captor.      
   In the account of  Gondolin and  its history  S is  fairly close 
 to the tale of The  Fall of  Gondolin, but  there are  some devel- 
 opments,  if  mostly of  a minor  kind. There  is first  a notable 
 statement  that  'Ylmir's  messages  come  up Sirion  bidding them 
 [i.e. the host of Turgon retreating from  the battle]  take refuge 
 in this valley', this is unlike the Tale, where Tuor  speaking the 
 words  of  Ulmo in  Gondolin says:  'There have  come to  the ears 
 of  Ulmo  whispers  of your  dwelling and  your hill  of vigilance 
 against the evil of Melko,  and he  is glad' (II. 161,  208). Here 
 in S we have the  first appearance  of the  idea that  the founda- 
 tion of Gondolin was  a part  of Ulmo's  design. But  Tuor's jour- 
 ney is as in the old story, and the visitation of  Ulmo is  in Nan 
 Tathrin,  not  at  Vinyamar.  The  bidding  of Ulmo  offers Turgon 
 similar choices, to prepare for war, or, if he  will not,  then to 
 send  people  of  Gondolin  down Sirion  to the  sea, to  seek for 
 Valinor. Here, however, there are differences.  In the  Tale, Ulmo 

 

  offers  scarcely  more  than  a  slender hope  that such  sailors from 
  Gondolin  would  reach  Valinor,  and  if  they  did, that  they would 
  persuade the Valar to act:                                            
                                                                       
     [The  Gods)  hide  their  land and  weave about  it inaccessible 
     magic  that  no evil  come to  its shores.  Yet still  might thy 
     messengers win there  and turn  their hearts  that they  rise in 
     wrath and smite Melko ... (II. 161 - 2).                            
                                                                       
   In  S, on  the other  hand, the  people of  Gondolin, if  they will 
   not  go  to  war  against  Morgoth,  are  to  desert their  city ('the 
   people  of  Gondolin   are  to   prepare  for   flight')  -   cf.  The 
   Silmarillion   p.   240:   '[Ulmo)  bade   him  depart,   and  abandon 
   the  fair  and  mighty  city  that he  had built,  and go  down Sirion 
   to  the  sea'  -  and  at  the mouths  of Sirion  Ylmir will  not only 
   aid  them  in  the building  of a  fleet but  will himself  guide them 
   over  the  ocean.  But  if  Turgon  will  accept Ylmir's  counsel, and 
   prepare  for  war,  then  Tuor  is  to  go  to  Hithlum   with  Gnomes 
 from  Gondolin  and  'draw  Men  once   more  into   alliance  with 
 the  Elves,  for  "without  Men  the Elves  shall not  prevail against 
 the Orcs  and  Balrogs".'  Of  this  strange   bidding  there   is  no 
 trace  in  the  Tale;  nor  is  it  said  there  that  Ulmo   knew  of 
 Meglin,  and  knew  that   this  treachery   would  bring   about  the 
 end  of  Gondolin  at  no  distant  time.  These  features  are absent 
 also  from  The  Silmarillion;  Ulmo  does  indeed  foresee  the  ruin 
 of  the  city,  but  his  foreseeing  is not  represented as  being so 
 precise:  'Thus  it  may come  to pass  that the  curse of  the Noldor 
 shall  find  thee  too  ere  the  end,  and  treason awake  within thy 
 walls. Then they shall be in peril of fire' (p. 126).                  
     The  description  of  the  Vale  of Gondolin  in S  is essentially 
 as  in  the  Tale,  with  a  few added  details. As  in the  Tale, the 
 rocky  height  of  Amon  Gwareth  was  not  in  the  centre   of  the 
 plain but  nearest to  Sirion -  that is,  nearest to  the Way  of Es- 


50 

 cape (II. 158, 177). In S, the level top of the hill is said to have 
 been achieved by the people of Gondolin themselves, who also 
 'polished its sides to the smoothness of glass'. The Way of Es- 
 cape is still, as in the Tale (II. 163), a tunnel made by the 
 Gnomes - the Dry River and the Orfalch Echor have not yet 
 been conceived; and the meaning of the name 'Way of Escape' 

 

                                      
                                                                  
 is made very clear. both  a way  of escape from Gondolin,  if the 
 need  should  ever  arise,  and a  way of  escape from  the outer 
 world and from Morgoth. In the Tale (ibid.) it  is said  only that 
 there  had  been  divided counsels  concerning its  delving, 'yet 
 pity for the enthralled Noldoli had prevailed in  the end  to its 
 making'.  The  'Guarded  Plain'  into  which  the  Way  of Escape 
 issued is the Vale of Gondolin. An additional detail in S is that 
 the hills were  lower in  the region  of the  Way of  Escape, and 
 the spells of Ylmir there strongest (because nearest to Sirion). 
   The cairn of Fingolfin,  added in  pencil in  S, is  an element 
 that entered the legends in  the Quenta  (p. 129)  and the  Lay o 
 Leithian (III. 286 - 7); the duel of Fingolfin with  Morgoth does 
 not appear in S (p. 63). -  Here in  S it  is said  that Thorndor 
 'removed his  eyries to  the Northern  heights of  the encircling 
 mountains'.  In  the Tale  the eyries  in Cristhorn,  the Eagles' 
 Cleft,  were  in  the  mountains  south  of  Gondolin,  but  in S 
 Cristhorn is in the northern heights: this is already the case in 
 the  Fragment  of  an  alliterative Lay  of Earendel (III. 143). 
 Thorndor  had  come  there  from  Thangorodrim  (stated   in  the 
 Quenta, p. 164); cf. the 'later  Tuor' in Unfinished Tales  (p. 43 
 and note  25): 'the  folk of  Thorondor, who  dwelt once  even on 
 Thangorodrim  ere  Morgoth  grew  so  mighty,  and  dwell  now in 
 the Mountains of Turgon since the fall  of Fingolfin.'  This goes 
 back to the tale of The Theft of Melko, where  there is  a refer- 
 ence  g. 149)  to the time 'when  Sorontur and  his folk fared to 
 the  Iron  Mountains  and  there abode,  watching all  that Melko 
 did'.                                                             
   Some  other  points  concerning  the story  of Gondolin  may be 
 noticed.  The  escort  of Noldoli,  promised to  Tuor by  Ulmo in 
 the  Land  of  Willows,  of   whom  Voronwe   (in  S   given  the 
 Gnomish  form  of  the  name,  Bronweg)  was  the  only  one  who 
 did  not  desert him (II. 155-6),  has disappeared;  and 'Bronweg 
 had once been in Gondolin',  which is  not the  case in  the Tale 
 (II. 156-7).  -  In  the  Tale  Tuor  wedded  Idril when  he 'had 
 dwelt  among  the  Gondothlim many  years' (II.  164); in  S this 
 took place three years after his  coming to  the hidden  city, in 
 The Silmarillion seven years after (p. 241). -  In the Tale there 
 is  no  mention  of  Meglin's  support  of  Turgon's  rejection o 
 Ulmo's  bidding  (cf.  The  Silmarillion  p. 240:  'Maeglin spoke 

 

  ever against Tuor in the  councils of  the King'),  nor of  the op- 
  position of Idril to her father (this is not in  The Silmarillion). 
  -  The  closing  of Gondolin  to all  fugitives and  the forbidding 
  of the people to leave the  valley is  mentioned in  S but  not ex- 
  plained.                                                           
    The  sentence  'Meglin...  purchases  his  life  when   taken  to 
  Angband  by  revealing  Gondolin  and  its  secrets'  shows  almost 
  certainly,  I  think, that  an important  structural change  in the 
  story of the fall of the city had  now entered.  In the  Tale Melko 
  had  discovered  Gondolin  before Meglin  was  captured,   and  his 
  treachery lay in his giving an  exact account  of the  structure of 
  the  city  and  the   preparations  made   for  its   defence  (see 
  H.  210-11);  but  the  words  'by  revealing   Gondolin'  strongly 
  suggest  the  later  story,  in  which Morgoth  did not  know where 
  it lay.                                                            
                                                                    
    Lastly,  there is  a development  in the  early history  of Tuor: 
  that he  became a  slave of  'the faithless  men' in  Hithlum after 
  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  Moreover  Tuor's  parentage is 
  now  finally  established.  Huor  has been  mentioned in  a rewrit- 


51 

  ten passage of S ($9), but not named  as father  of Tuor;  and this 
  is the first occurrence of  his mother  Rian, and  so of  the story 
  that she died  seeking Huor's  body on  the battlefield.  It cannot 
  be  said whether  the story  of Tuor's  birth in  the wild  and his 
  fostering by Elves had yet arisen.                                 
                                                                    
                                  17                                 
                                                                    
    In  commenting  on  the  conclusion  of   the  mythology   in  S, 
  here comprised in the three sections 17 - 19,  I point  to features 
  that derive from  or contradict  those outlines  and notes  from an 
  earlier period  that are  collected in  Vol. II  chapter V  and the 
  earlier  part of  Chapter VI.  S is  here an  extremely abbreviated 
  outline,  composed  very  rapidly  -  my  father was  indeed chang- 
  ing his conceptions as he wrote.                                   
    For the narrative  of $17  the primary  extant early  sources are 
  the 'schemes' or  plot-outlines which  I have  called 'B'  and 'C', 
  in the passages given in H. 253 and 254-5 respectively.            
    At the  beginning of  this section,  before emendation,  the sur- 
  vivors  of  Gondolin  were  already  at the  Mouths of  Sirion when 

 

  Elwing  came  there;  and  this  goes  back  to  8 and  C ('Elwing 
  ... flees to them [i.e. Tuor and Idril] with the Nauglafring',       
  II. 254).  But earlier  in S  ($15) the  destruction of  Dior took 
  place before the  fall of  Gondolin; hence  the revision  here, to 
  make  Elwing  'receive the  survivors of  Gondolin'. (In  the Tale 
  of the Nauglafring, H. 242, the  fall of  Gondolin and  the attack 
  on Dior took place on the same day.)                               
    Following  this,  there  is  a  major development  in S.  In the 
  early outlines there is the story, only glimpsed, of the  March of 
  the  Elves  of  Valinor  into  the  Great Lands;  and in  B (only) 
  there is a reference to  'the sorrow  and wrath  of the  Gods', of 
  which I said in my discussion of  these outlines (II. 25  I): 'the 
  meaning can surely only be that the March of the Elves from        
  Valinor was undertaken in direct opposition to the will of the 
  Valar, that the Valar  were bitterly  opposed to  the intervention 
  of the Elves of Valinor  in the  affairs of  the Great  Lands.' On 
  the  other  hand, the  bare hints  of what  happened when  the as- 
  sault on Melko took place show that greater powers than the        
  Eldar  alone  were  present:  Noldorin (the  Vala Salmar,  who en- 
  tered  the world  with Ulmo,  and loved  the Noldoli),  and Tulkas 
  himself, who overthrew Melko in the Battle of  the Silent  Pools  
  (outline C, H. 278). The only hint in the  outlines of  Ulmo's in- 
  tervention  is  his  saving  of  Earendel from  shipwreck, bidding 
  him sail to Kor with the words  'for this  hast thou  been brought 
  out  of  the Wrack  of Gondolin'  (B, similarly  in C).  The March 
  of  the  Eldar from  Valinor was  brought about  by the  coming of 
  the birds from Gondolin.                                           
    In  S,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  Ulmo (Ylmir)  who directly 
  brings  about  the intervention  from the  West by  his reproaches 
  to  the Valar,  bidding them  rescue the  remnants of  the Noldoli 
  and the Silmarils; and the host is led by 'the sons of the Valar', 
  commanded  by  Fionwe   -  who   is  here   the  son   of  Tulkas! 
  Fionwe  is  frequently  named  in  the  Lost Tales  as the  son of 
  Manwe,  while  the  son  of  Tulkas  was  Telimektar  (who  became 
  the  constellation  Orion).  The  naming  Fionwe  son   of  Tulkas 
  may  have  been  a simple  slip, though  the same  is said  in the 
  Quenta as first written  (p. 178);  subsequently Fionwe  again be- 
  comes the son of Manwe (p. 185).                                   
    'Remembering  Swanhaven  few  of  the  Teleri  go   with  them': 

 

  in the outline B the presence of  the Solosimpi  on the  March is 
  referred  to without  comment, while  in C  they only  agreed to 
  accompany  the  expedition  on  condition  that  they  remained by 
  the sea (see II. 258), and this  was in  some way  associated with 
  their remembrance of the Kinslaying.                              
    The desertion of Kor at  this time  is referred  to in  the out- 
  lines, but  only in  connection with  Earendel's coming  there and 
  finding  it  empty;  I  noted (II.  257) that  'it seems  at least 


52 

  strongly  implied  that  Kor  was  empty  because  the   Elves  of 
  Valinor  had  departed  into  the  Great Lands',  and this  is now 
  seen to be certain.                                               
    The narrative  in S  now turns  to Tuor.  The statement  that he 
  grew  old  at  Sirion's  mouths  -  a  statement  that  was struck 
  out  - goes  back to  the old  schemes. His  ship is  now Earame, 
  unusnslated;  previously  it   was  Alqarame   'Swanwing',  while 
  Earame  was  Earendel's  earlier ship,  translated 'Eaglepinion', 
  which  foundered.  In  The Silmarillion  Tuor's ship  is Earrame, 
  as in S, with the meaning 'Sea-Wing'.                             
    In  S, Idril  departs in  company with  Tuor. This  is different 
  from  the  original schemes,  where Tuor  leaves alone,  and Idril 
  'sees him too late', 'laments', and afterwards 'vanishes'.  But in 
  the outline C it seems  that she  found him,  for 'Tuor  and Idril 
  some  say  sail  now  in  Swanwing  and  may  be seen  going swift 
  down the wind at dawn and dusk'.                                  
    In S, the earlier history of Earendel's ship-building  and ship- 
  wrecks  in  the Fiord  of the  Mermaid and  at Falasquil  has, ap- 
  parently, been abandoned entirely, and Wingelot  is his  first and 
  only ship; but there remains  the motive  that Earendel  wishes to 
  seek for his father, whereas Ylmir bids him sail to  Valinor (this 
  last  being  afterwards  struck out).  His adventures  in Wingelot 
  are referred to in  S but  not otherwise  indicated, save  for the 
  slaying of Ungoliant 'in the South',  there is  no mention  of the 
  Sleeper  in  the  Tower  of  Pearl.  In  C  the  long   voyage  of 
  Earendel,  accompanied  by  Voronwe,  that  finally  took  them to 
  Kor,  included  an  encounter  with  Ungweliante, though  this was 
  after  his  southern  voyage:  'Driven  west.  Ungweliante.  Magic 
  Isles. Twilit Isle. Littleheart's gong awakes  the Sleeper  in the 
  Tower   of   Pearl.'  In   another  outline   Earendel  encounters 
  Wirilome  (Gloomweaver)  in  the  South (II. 260). In  the account 

 

  in  S  he  does  not  on  this  great voyage  come to  Kor, though 
  from it, as in B and C, he returns to 'the Waters of  Sirion' (the 
  delta) and  finds the  dwellings there  desolate. Now  however en- 
  ters the motive of the  last desperate  attempt of  the Feanorians 
  to  regain the  Silmaril of  Beren and  Luthien, their  descent on 
  the  Havens  of  Sirion,  and  their  destruction.  Thus  the raid 
  on  the  Havens  has remained,  but it  is no  longer the  work of 
  Melko (see II.  258) and  is brought  into the  story of  the Oath 
  of  Feanor.  As  S was  first written  only Maidros  survived; but 
  Maglor was  added. (In  $14, as  written, all  the Sons  of Feanor 
  save  Maglor  were  slain  at  the  time  of  the attack  on Dior, 
  though   this   passage   was  afterwards   struck  out.   In  The 
  Silmarillion  Celegorm,  Curufin,  and  Caranthir  were  slain  at 
  that  time,  and  Amrod  and  Amras  (later  names  of  Damrod and 
  Diriel) were slain in the attack on the Havens of Sirion,  so that 
  only Maidros and Maglor were left.)                                
    In the old outlines Elwing was taken  captive (as  is to  be de- 
  duced, by Melko); there  is no  mention of  her release  from cap- 
  tivity, and she next appears in references to  the sinking  of her 
  ship  (on  the  way  to  Tol   Eressea)  and   the  loss   of  the 
  Nauglafring;   after  which   she  becomes   a  seabird   to  seek 
  Earendel.  Earendel  returning  from his  long voyage  and finding 
  the  dwellings  at  Sirion's  mouth sacked,  goes with  Voronwe to 
  the ruins of Gondolin, and  in an  isolated note (II. 264,  XV) he 
  'goes even to the empty Halls of Iron seeking Elwing'.             
    All this  has disappeared  in S,  with the  new story  of Elwing 
  casting herself and the Nauglafring into the sea, except  that she 
  still  becomes  a  seabird  (thus  changed by  Ulmo) and  flies to 
  seek Earendel about all the shores  of the  world. The  early out- 
  lines are then at variance: in C it is said that Earendel dwelt on 
  the Isle  of Seabirds  and hoped  that Elwing  would come  to him, 
  'but she is seeking him wailing along  all the  shores' -  yet 'he 
  will find Elwing at the Faring Forth', while in the  short outline 
  E  (II.  260)  she  came  to  him  as  a  seamew  on  the  Isle of 
  Seabirds.  But  in  S Elwing  is further  mentioned only  as being 
  sought by Earendel when he  sets sail  again, until  she reappears 
  at the end ($19) and is restored to Earendel.                      


53 

    The introduction of Elrond  in S  is of  great interest.  He has 
  no  brother  as  yet;  and  he  is  saved   by  Maidros   (in  The 

 

                                            
                                                                     
   Silmarillion,  p.  247,  Elrond  and  Elros  were saved  by Maglor). 
   When  the  Elves  return  into  the  West  he  elects  to  stay  'on 
   earth',  being 'bound  by his  mortal half'.  It is  most remarkable 
   that although the idea of  a choice  of fate  for the  Half-elven is 
   already  present,  it  takes  a curiously  different form  from that 
   which  it  was  to  take  afterwards,  and  which  became  of  great 
   importance  in  The  Lard  of  the  Rings;  for  afterwards, Elrond, 
   unlike  his  brother  Elros  Tar-Minyatur,  elected  to   remain  an 
   Elf - yet his later  choice derives  in part  from the  earlier con- 
   ception, for  he elected  also not  to go  into the  West. In  S, to 
   choose  his  'elfin  half'  seems  to  have  meant  to   choose  the 
   West; afterwards, it meant to choose Elvish immortality.           
        Earendel  learnt  what  had  happened at  the Mouths  of Sirion 
   from  Bronweg  (earlier  it  was  Littleheart  son  of  Bronweg  who 
   survived  the  sack  of  the  havens,  H.  276  note  5),  and  with 
   Bronweg  he  sails  again  in  Wingelot  and  comes  to  Kor,  which 
   he  finds  deserted,   and  his   raiment  becomes   encrusted  with 
   the  dust  of diamonds;  not daring  to go  further into  Valinor he 
   builds a tower on an isle in the  northern seas,  'to which  all the 
  sea-birds of  the world  repair'. Bronweg  is not  further men- 
 tioned.  Almost  all  of  this,  other   than  the   statement  that 
 Earendel did not  dare venture  further into  Valinor, goes  back to 
 the  outline  C.  The  tower  on  the Isle  of Seabirds,  which sur- 
 vives the The  SilmarilLion (p.  250), is  mentioned in  an isolated 
 note on the Earendel story (II. 264, xvii).                           
       In the early outlines Earendel now  set out  on his  last voy- 
 age. In B, which  is here  very brief,  his sailing  to the  Isle of 
 Seabirds  is  followed by  'his voyage  to the  firmament'. In  C he 
   sails with Voronwe to the halls of Mandos seeking for tidings 
   of Tuor, Idril, and Elwing; he 'reaches the bar at the margin of 
   the world and sets sail on the  oceans of  the firmament  in order 
   to  gaze  over  the  Earth. The  Moon mariner  chases him  for his 
   brightness and he dives through the  Door of  Night.' In  the out- 
  line  E  (II.  260)  'Elwing  as  a  seamew comes  to him.  He sets 
   sail over the margent of the world.' In the early  note associated 
   with the poem 'The Bidding of  the Minstrel'  (II. 261)  he 'sails 
   west again to the lip of the world, just as the Sun is diving into 
  the  sea', and  'sets sail  upon the  sky', and  in the  preface to 
   'The Shores of Faery' (II. 262) he                                 

 

                                                     
                                                                  
 sat long while in his old age upon  the Isle  of Seabirds  in the 
 Northern  Waters  ere  he  set  forth  upon  a  last  voyage.  He 
 passed  Taniquetil  and  even  Valinor,  and  drew his  bark over 
 the  bar  at  the margin  of the  world, and  launched it  on the 
 Oceans  of  the  Firmament.  Of  his  ventures  there no  man has 
 told,  save  that  hunted  by  the  orbed  Moon  he fled  back to 
 Valinor,  and  mounting  the  towers  of  Kor  upon the  rocks of 
 Eglamar he gazed back upon the Oceans of the World.               
                                                                  
 The passage in S is  different from  all of  these, in  that here 
 Earendel's voyage into the sky is  achieved with  the aid  of the 
 wings  of  seabirds,  and  it introduces the  idea of  his being 
 scorched  by  the  Sun  as  well as  hunted by  the Moon.  I sug- 
 gested (II. 259) that Earendel originally sailed  into the  sky in 
 continuing search for Elwing, and this is now corroborated        
                                                                  
                            18 and 19.                             
                                                                  
 The  story  in  S  now  leaves  Earendel,  wandering the  sky 'as 
 a  fugitive  star',  and  comes to  the march  of Fionwe  and the 
 Last Battle (a term that is used in S both of the Last  Battle in 
 the mythological  record,  in  which the  hosts of  Valinor over- 


54 

 threw Morgoth, and of the Last Battle of  the world,  declared in 
 prophecy,  when  Morgoth  will  come  back  through the  Door and 
 Fionwe will fight him on the  plains of  Valinor). Almost  all of 
 this now enters the mythology for the first time; and  almost all 
 of what very little survives from the earliest period on the sub- 
 ject of the March of the Elves  of Valinor (II. 278-80)  has dis- 
 appeared.  There  is  no mention  of Tulkas,  of his  battle with 
 Melko, of Noldorin, of the hostility of  Men; virtually  the only 
 point  in common  is that  after the  overthrow of  Morgoth Elves 
 depart into the West. In the old story the Silmarils play no part 
 at the end (cf. the jotting 'What became  of the  Silmarils after 
 the capture of Melko?' II. 259); but  now in  S there  appear the 
 lineaments of a  story concerning  their fate.  Now also  we have 
 the first mention anywhere  of the  breaking of  the Northwestern 
 world  in the  struggle to  overthrow Morgoth;  and (in  an addi- 
 tion  to  the  text)  the  chain Angainor  appears from  the Lost 
 Tales. (Angainor is not named in  the earlier  passage in  S ($2) 
 concerning  the  binding of  Morgoth. It  appears (later)  in the 

 

  Lay of Leithian, in a puzzling reference to 'the chain Angainor 
  that ere Doom/for Morgoth shall by Gods be wrought'; see 
  III. 205, 209-10.) 
     In the story of the fate of the Silmarils, Maglor says to 
  Maidros that there are two sons of Feanor now left, and two 
  Silmarils. Does this imply that the Silmaril of Beren was lost 
  when Elwing cast herself into the sea with the Nauglafring 
  (unlike the later story)? The answer is certainly yes; the story 
  in S is not comprehensible otherwise. Thus when Maglor casts 
  himself (changed to casts the jewel) into the fiery pit, having 
  stolen one of the Silmarils of the Iron Crown from Fionwe, 
 'one Silmaril is now in the sea, and one in the earth'. The third 
  was the Silmaril that remained in Fionwe's keeping; and it was 
  that one that was bound to Earendel's brow. We thus have a re- 
 markable stage of transition, in which the Silmarils have at last 
  achieved primary importance, but where the fate of each has 
 not arrived at the final form; and the conclusion, seen to be in- 
  evitable once reached, that it was the Silmaril regained by 
  Beren and Luthien that became the Evening Star, has not been 
  achieved. In S, Earendel becomes a star before receiving the 
  Silmaril; but originally, as I have said (II. 265), 'there is no 
  suggestion that the Valar hallowed his ship and set him in the 
 sky, nor that his light was that of the Silmaril'. In this respect 
  also S is transitional, for at the end the later story appears. 
    The Elves of the Outer Lands (Great Lands), after the con- 
  quest of Morgoth, set sail from Luthien (later emended to 
  Leithien), explained as 'Britain or England'. For the forms 
  Luthany, Luthien, Leithian, Leithien and the texts in which they 
  occur see III. 154. It is remarkable that as S was originally 
  written Luthien is both the name of Thingol's daughter and the 
  name of England. 
    It is further said in S that the Elves 'ever still from time to 
  time set sail [from Luthien] leaving the world ere they fade'. 
  'The Gnomes and many of the Ilkorins and Teleri and Qendi 
  repeople the Lonely Isle. Some go back to live upon the shores 
  of Faery and in Valinor, but Cor and Tun remain desolate.' 
  Some of this can be brought into relation with the old outlines 
  (see II. 308 - 9), but how much more was retained in mind, be- 
  yond 'The Elves retreated to Luthany' and 'Many of the Elves 

 

  of  Luthany  sought  back  west  over  the  sea  and  settled  in Tol 
  Eressea',  cannot  be  determined.  That  even  this  much   was  re- 
  tained  is  however very  instructive. The  peculiar relation  of the 
  Elves to England  keeps a  foothold, as  it were,  in the  actual ar- 
  ticulation of the narrative; as also the idea  that if  they remained 
  in 'the world' they would fade (see II. 326).                        
    It  is  not  made  clear  why  'Cor  and  Tin'  remained  desolate, 
  since  some  of  the  Elves  'go  back  to  live  upon the  shores of 
  Faery and  in Valinor'.  In the  original conception  (as I  have ar- 
  gued  its  nature,  II.  280)  the  Eldar of  Valinor, when  they re- 


55 

  turned  from  the  Great  Lands  where  they  had  gone  against  the 
  will  of the  Valar, were  forbidden to  re-enter Valinor  and there- 
  fore  settled  in  Tol  Eressea,  as  'the  Exiles  of  Kor (although 
  some  did return  in the  end to  Valinor, since  Ingil son  of Inwe, 
  according  to  Meril-i-Turinqi  g.  129),  'went  back  long  ago  to 
  Valinor  and  is with  Manwe'). But  in the  story as  told in  S the 
  idea  that  the  March  of  the  Eldar  was against  the will  of the 
  Valar,  and   aroused  them   to  wrath,   has  been   abandoned, and 
  'the  sons  of  the  Valar'  now  lead  the  hosts  out of  the West; 
  why  then  should  the  Elves  of  Tun  not  return  there?   And  we 
  have  the  statement  in  S  that  Tol  Eressea  was   repeopled  not 
  only  by Gnomes  (and nothing  at all  is said  of their  pardon) and 
  Ilkorins,  but  also  by  Qendi  (=  the  later  Vanyar)  and Teleri, 
  Elves  who  came  from  Valinor  for  the   assault  on   Morgoth.  I 
  cannot  explain  this;  and  must  conclude that  my father  was only 
  noting  down  the  chief  points   of  his   developing  conceptions, 
  leaving much unwritten.                                              
    There  now   appears  the   idea  that   the  Gods   thrust Morgoth 
  through  the  Door  of  Night  'into  the   outer  dark   beyond  the 
  Walls of the World',* and  there is  the first  reference to  the es- 
  cape  of Thu  (Sauron) in  the Last  Battle. There  is also  a proph- 
  ecy  concerning  the  ultimate  battle,  when  the  world is  old and 
  the   Gods   weary,   and   Morgoth  will   come  back   through  the 
  Door  of  Night;  then  Fionwe  with  Turin  beside  him  shall fight 
  Morgoth  on  the  plain  of Valinor,  and Turin  shall slay  him with 
  his  black  sword.  The  Silmarils  shall  be  recovered,  and  their 
  light  released,  the  Trees  rekindled,  the  Mountains  of  Valinor 
                                                                      
  (*See the commentary on the Ambarkanta, p. 296.)                     

 

   
                                                                    
  levelled so that the light goes out over all  the world,  and Gods 
  and Elves shall grow young  again. Into  this final  resolution of 
  the evil in the world it would prove unprofitable, I think, to en- 
  quire  too closely.  References to  it have  appeared in  print in 
  Unfinished  Tales,  pp.  395  -  6,  in  the  remarks  on Gandalf: 
  'Manwe  will  not  descend  from  the  Mountain  until  the  Dagor 
  Dagorath,  and  the  coming  of  the  End,  when  Melkor returns', 
  and  in  the  alliterative  poem  accompanying this,  'until Dagor 
  Dagorath  and  the  Doom  cometh'.  The  earliest  references  are 
  probably  in  the  outline  C (II. 282), where  (when the  Pine of 
  Belaurin  is  cut  down) 'Melko  is thus  now out  of the  world - 
  but one day he will find a way  back, and  the last  great uproars 
  will begin  before the  Great End'.  In the  Lost Tales  there are 
  many  references  to  the  Great End,  most of  which do  not con- 
  cern us here; but at the end of the tale of The Hiding  of Valinor 
  is  told  (I.  219)  of  'that  great  foreboding that  was spoken 
  among  the  Gods  when  first  the  Door  of  Night  was  opened': 
                                                                    
      For  'tis  said  that  ere  the  Great  End  come  Melko  shall in 
      some  wise  contrive  a   quarrel  between   Moon  and   Sun,  and 
      Ilinsor  shall  seek  to  follow  Urwendi  through the  Gates, and 
      when  they  are  gone  the  Gates of  both East  and West  will be 
      destroyed,  and Urwendi  and Ilinsor  shall be  lost. So  shall it 
      be  that  Fionwe  Urion,  son  of  Manwe,  of  love   for  Urwendi 
      shall  in  the  end  be  Melko's  bane,  and  shall   destroy  the 
      world  to  destroy  his  foe,  and  so  shall  all things  then be 
      rolled away.                                                   
                                                                    
  (Cf. the  outline C,  II. 281:  'Fionwe's rage  and grief  [at the 
  death  of  Urwendi].  In  the  end he  will slay  Melko.') Whether 
  any of this  prophecy underlies  the idea  of the  ultimate return 
  of  Morgoth  through  the  Door  of  Night  I  cannot say.  At the 
  end of the Tale of Turambar,  after the  account of  the 'deifica- 
  tion'  of  Turin and  Nienor, there  is a  prophecy (II. 116) that 
                                                                    
      Turambar indeed shall stand beside Fionwe in the Great         
      Wrack,  and  Melko  and his  drakes shall  curse the  sword of 


56 

      Mormakil.                                                      

 

  But there is no indication in S of how 'the  spirit of  Turin' will 
  survive to  slay Morgoth  in the  ultimate battle  on the  plain of 
  Valinor.                                                            
    That  the Mountains  of Valinor  shall be  levelled, so  that the 
  light of the rekindled Trees goes out over all  the world,  is also 
  found  in  the  earliest  texts;  cf.  the  isolated  passage  in C 
  (II. 285) where is told the  Elves' prophecy  of the  (second) Far- 
  ing Forth:                                                          
                                                                     
    Laurelin  and  Silpion  will  be  rekindled,  and   the  mountain 
    wall  being destroyed  then  soft  radiance  will be  spread over 
    all the world, and the Sun and Moon will be recalled.             
                                                                     
  But this  prophecy is  associated with  other conceptions  that had 
  clearly been abandoned.                                             
    At the end,  with the  aid of  the Silmaril  Elwing is  found and 
  restored,  but  there  is  no  indication of  how the  Silmaril was 
  used  to  this  purpose.   Elwing  in   this  account   sails  with 
  Earendel, who bears the third Silmaril,  and so  he shall  sail un- 
  til he sees 'the last battle gathering upon the plains of Valinor'. 
    On  the  reappearance  of the  name Eriol  at the  very end  of S 
  see II. 300.                                                        
                                                                     
    I do not intend here to relate this version to  that in  the pub- 
  lished work, but  will conclude  this long  discussion of  the con- 
  cluding sections 17  - 19  with a  brief summary.  As I  have said, 
  S is  here extremely  condensed, and  it is  here even  harder than 
  elsewhere  to  know or  guess what  of the  old material  my father 
  had suppressed  and what  was still  'potentially' present.  But in 
  any case nothing of  the old  layer that  is not  present in  S was 
  ever to reappear.                                                   
    In the present version, Earendel has  still not  come to  his su- 
  preme  function  as  the  Messenger  who  spoke  before  the Powers 
  on  behalf  of  the  Two  Kindreds,  though  the birds  of Gondolin 
  have  been abandoned  as the  bringers of  tidings to  Valinor, and 
  Ulmo  becomes  the  sole  agent  of  the  final assault  on Morgoth 
  out  of  the  West.  The  voyages  of  Earendel  have  been simpli- 
  fied:  he  now  has the  one great  voyage -  without Voronwe  - in 
  Wingelot,  in  which  he  slew  Ungoliant,  and the  second voyage, 

 

  with  Voronwe,  which takes  him to  Kor -  and the  desertion of 
  Kor (Tun)  still depends  on the  March of  the Eldar,  which has 
  already  taken place  when he  comes there.  His voyage  into the 
  sky  is  now  achieved  by  the  wings  of  birds; and  the Silmaril 
  still plays no  part in  his becoming  a star,  for the  Silmaril of 
  Beren  and  Luthien  was  drowned  with   the  Nauglafring   at  the 
  Mouths  of  Sirion.  But  the  Silmarils at  last become  central to 
  the final acts of  the mythological  drama, and  - unlike  the later 
  story - only  one of  the two  Silmarils that  remained in  the Iron 
  Crown  is  made  away  with  by  a  son  of  Feanor   (Maglor);  the 
  second is given to Earendel by the Gods, and the later story is 
  visible at the end of S, where his boat 'is drawn over Valinor 
  to the Outer Seas' and launched into the Outer Dark, where he 
  sails with the Silmaril on his brow, keeping watch on Morgoth. 
    The destruction of the people of Sirion's Mouths now be- 
  comes the final evil of the Oath of Feanor. Elrond appears, 
  with a remarkable reference to the choice given to him as half- 
  elven. The coming of the hosts of the West to the overthrow 
  of Morgoth is now an act of the Valar, and the hosts are led by 
  the Sons of the Valar. England, as Luthien (Leithien), remains 
  as the land from which the Elves of the &eat Lands set sail 
  at the end for Tol Eressea; but I suspect that virtually all the 
  highly complex narrative which I attempted to reconstruct 
  (II. 308 - 9) had gone - Earendel and Ing(we) and the hostility 
  of Osse, the Ingwaiwar, the seven invasions of Luthany. 
     The original ideas of the conclusion of the Eldar Days 
  (Melko's climbing of the Pine of Belaurin, the cutting down of 


57 

  the Pine, the warding of the sky by Telimektar and Ingil (Orion 
  and Sirius), II. 281 - 2) have disappeared; in S, Morgoth is 
  thrust through the Door of Night, and Earendel becomes its 
  guardian and guarantee against Morgoth's return, until the End. 
  And lastly, and most pregnant for the future, Thu escapes the 
  Last Battle when Morgoth was overcome, 'and dwells still in 
  dark places'.                                                      

 

 

 

                                     III.                                     
                                                                             
                                  THE QUENTA.                                 
                                                                             
 This  work  is extant  in a  typescript (made  by my  father) for            
 which there is no trace of any preliminary notes or  drafts. That            
 the Quenta, or at any rate the greater part of it, was written in            
 1930  seems  to  me to  be certainly  deducible (see  the commen-            
 tary on  $10,  pp. 213-4). After a  quite different  initial section            
 (which is the origin of the Valaquenta) this  text becomes  a re-            
 working  and  expansion  of  the 'Sketch  of the  Mythology'; and            
 it quickly becomes evident that  my father  had S  (the 'Sketch')            
 in front of him when  he wrote  the Quenta  (which I  shall refer            
 to  as 'Q').  The latter  moves towards  The Silmarillion  in its            
 published form,  both in  structure and  in language  (indeed al-            
 ready in S the first forms of many sentences can be perceived).              
   Eriol (as in S; not AElfwine) is mentioned both in the title of            
 Q and at the end of the work,  and his  coming to  Kortirion, but            
 (again as in S) there is no trace of the Cottage of Lost Play. As            
 I have said of its absence  from S  (p. 48),  this does  not dem-            
 onstrate that my father had  rejected the  conception in  its en-            
 tirety:  in  S he  may have  omitted it  because his  purpose was            
 solely  to recount  the history  of the  Elder Days  in condensed            
 form, while in the title of Q it is said that the work was 'drawn            
 from the Book of Lost Tales  which Eriol  of Leithien  wrote'. At            
 least then,  we may  think, some  venue in  which the  Lost Tales            
 were told to Eriol in Kortirion still existed.*                              
   The title makes it very  plain that  while Q  was written  in a            
 finished  manner,  my  father saw  it as  a compendium,  a 'brief            
                                                                             
 (*It is said at the end of the Quenta that Eriol  'remembered things  that he 
 had heard in fair Cortirion'. But this Book  of Lost  Tales was  composed by 
 Eriol (according  to the  title) out  of a  'Golden Book'  which he  read in 
 Kortirion. (Previously the  Golden Book  of Tavrobel  was written  either by 
 Eriol (AElwine) himself, or by his son Heorrenda, or by some other person un- 
 named long after; see II. 291.))                                             
                                                                             
                                                                          

 

  history'  that was  'drawn from'  a much  longer work;  and this              
  aspect  remained  an  important  element  in  his  conception of              
  'The Silmarillion'  properly so  called. I  do not  know whether              
  this idea did indeed arise from the fact that the starting point              
  of the second  phase of  the mythological  narrative was  a con-              
  densed synopsis (S); but it seems likely  enough, from  the step              
  by step continuity that leads from  S through  Q to  the version              
  that was interrupted towards its end in 1937.                                 
    It seems very probable that the greater  number of  the exten-              
  sions and elaborations found  in Q  arose in  the course  of its              
  composition, and that while Q contains  features, omitted  in S,              
  which go back to the earliest version, these features argue only              
  a recollection of the Lost Tales (to be assumed  in any  case! -              
  and doubtless a very clear recollection), not a close derivation              
  from the actual text. If that had been the  case, one  might ex-              
  pect to find the re-emergence of actual phrasing here  and there;              
  but that seems to be markedly lacking.                                        
                                                                               
    The  history   of  the   typescript  becomes   rather  complex              
  towards  the  end  (from $15),  where my  father expanded  and re-            


58 

  typed  portions  of the  text (though  the discarded  pages were              
  not destroyed).  But I  see no  reason to  think that  much time              
  elapsed between the two versions;  for near  the very  end ($19)              
  the original typescript gives out, and  only the  second version              
  continues to the conclusion of the  Quenta, which  strongly sug-              
  gests that the revisions belong to the same time as the original              
  text.                                                                         
    Subsequently  the  whole  text  was  revised  throughout,  the              
  corrections being made  carefully in  ink; these  changes though              
  frequent are mostly small, and  very often  no more  than slight              
  alterations  of  expression.  This  'layer'  of  emendation  was              
  clearly the first;* afterwards further changes were made at dif-              
  ferent times, often very hastily and not always legibly  in pen-              
  cil. To present the text as first typed with annotation of every              
  small stylistic improvement is obviously quite  unnecessary, and              
                                                                               
  (*The occurrence of Beleriand in the original typescript,  first in  $13, note 
  10,  not  as  previously  by  emendation in  ink from  typescript Broseliand, 
  shows that some of this 'layer' was carried out while the typescript was still 
  in process of composition.)                                                    

 

  would  in  any  case  require  the  introduction  into  the  text   of  a 
  forest of  reference  numbers  to   the  notes.   The  text   given  here 
  includes,  therefore,   without  annotation,   all  minor   changes  that 
  in  no  way  affect  the  course  of  the narrative  or alter  its impli- 
  cations.  Those  emendations  that  are  not  taken  up  into   the  text 
  but  recorded  in  the  notes  are  marked  as  'late  changes'  if  they 
  are  clearly  distinguishable,  as  is  not  always  the  case,  from the 
  first 'layer' described above.                                            
    I  have  divided  the  text  into  the  same   19  divisions   made  in 
  S  (see  p.  11);  but  since  the  opening  of  Q  has   nothing  corre- 
  sponding in S this section is not given a number.                         
                                                                           
                                      *                                     
                                                                           
                                 THE QUENTA                                 
                                                                           
                                  herein is                                 
                                                                           
                              QENTA NOLDORINWA                              
                                                                           
                                     OT                                     
                                                                           
                             Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh.                           
                                                                           
                  This is the brief History of the Noldoli                  
                 or Gnomes, drawn from the Book of Lost Tales                
                 which Eriol of Leithien wrote, having read                 
                the Golden Book, which the Eldar call Parma                 
                 Kuluina,* in Kortirion in Tol Eressea, the                
                                Lonely Isle.                                

 

  After the making of the World by the  Allfather, who  in El-              
  vish tongue is named Iluvatar, many of the mightiest spirits              
  that dwelt with him came into  the world  to govern  it, be-              
  cause seeing it afar after it was made they were filled with              
  delight at  its beauty.  These spirits  the Elves  named the              
  Valar, which  is the  Powers, though  Men have  often called              
                                                                           
  (*The Elvish name of the Golden Book in the early dictionary of Qenya is 
    Parma Kuluinen (II. 310).)                                              

 

                                            
                                                                  
 them  Gods.  Many  spirits'  they  brought  in their  train, both 
 great  and  small,  and  some  of  these  Men have  confused with 
 the  Eldar  or  Elves:  but  wrongly,  for  they  were  before the 
 world,  but  Elves and  Men awoke  first in  the world  after the 
 coming  of  the  Valar.  Yet  in  the  making  of  Elves  and Men 


59 

 and  in  the  giving  to  each of  their especial  gifts Iluvatar 
 alone  had  part;  wherefore they  are  called  the  Children  of 
 the World or of Iluvatar.                                         
  The  chieftains  of  the   Valar  were   nine.  These   were the 
 names  of  the  Nine  Gods  in  Elvish  tongue  as it  was spoken 
 in  Valinor,  though  other  or  altered names  they have  in the 
 speech   of   the   Gnomes,   and  their   names  among   Men  am 
 manifold.  Manwe  was  the  Lord  of  the  Gods  and   Prince  of 
 the  airs and  winds and  the ruler  of the  sky. With  him dwelt 
 as  spouse  the  immortal lady  of the  heights, Varda  the maker 
 of  the  stars.  Next  in  might  and  closest  in  friendship to 
 Manwe  was  Ulmo  Lord  of  Waters,  who  dwells  alone   in  the 
 Outer  Seas,  but  has  in  government  all  waves   and  waters, 
 rivers,  fountains  and  springs,  throughout the  earth. Subject 
 to  him,  though  he  is often  of rebellious  mood, is  Osse the 
 master  of  the  seas  of  the  lands  of  Men,  whose  spouse is 
 Uinen  the  Lady of  the Sea.  Her hair  lies spread  through all 
 the  waters  under  skies.  Of  might  nigh  equal  to  Ulmo  was 
 Aule.  He was  a smith  and a  master of  crafts, but  his spouse 
 was  Yavanna,  the  lover  of fruits  and all  the growth  of the 
 soil.  In  might  was  she  next  among the  ladies of  the Valar 
 to  Varda.  Very  fair  was she,  and often  the Elves  named her 
 Palurien, the Bosom of the Earth.                                 
  The  Fanturi  were  called  those  brothers  Mandos  and Lorien. 
 Nefantur the first was also called,  the master  of the  houses of 
 the dead, and the gatherer of the spirits of the slain. Olofantur 
 was  the  other, maker  of visions  and of  dreams; and  his gar- 
 dens in the land of the Gods were  the fairest  of all  places in 
 the world and filled with many spirits of beauty and power.       
  Strongest of all the  Gods in  limbs and  greatest in  all feats 
 of  prowess  and  valour  was  Tulkas,  for  which reason  he was 
 surnamed  Poldorea,  the Strong One,(2) and  he  was   the  enemy 
 and  foe  of  Melko.  Orome  was  a mighty  lord and  little less 

 

                                           
                                                                                     
 in strength than Tulkas. He was a hunter, and trees he loved                         
 (whence   he   was   called  Aldaron   and  by   the  Gnomes                         
 Tavros,(3) Lord of Forests),  and delighted  in horses  and in                         
 hounds.  He hunted  even in  the dark  earth before  the Sun                         
 was lit, and loud were his horns, as still  they are  in the                         
 friths  and pastures  that Orome  possesses in  Valinor. Vana                         
 was his spouse, the Queen of Flowers, the younger  sister of                         
 Varda and Palurien,  and the  beauty both  of heaven  and of                         
 earth is in her face and in her works. Yet mightier than she                         
 is Nienna who dwells with  Nefantur Mandos.  Pity is  in her                         
 heart,  and  mourning and  weeping come  to her,  but shadow                         
 is her realm and night her throne.                                                   
  Last  do  all  name  Melko.  But   the  Gnomes,   who  most                         
 have  suffered  from  his  evil,  will  not  speak  his name                         
 (Moeleg) in their own  tongue's form,  but call  him Morgoth                         
 Bauglir, the  Black God  Terrible. Very  mighty was  he made                         
 by Iluvatar, and some of the powers of all the Valar he pos-                         
 sessed, but to evil uses did  he turn  them. He  coveted the                         
 world and the lordship of Manwe, and the  realms of  all the                         
 Gods;  and  pride  and jealousy  and lust  grew ever  in his                         
 heart, till he became unlike his  wise and  mighty brethren.                         
 Violence he loved and wrath and destruction, and  all excess                         
 of cold and flame. But darkness most he  used for  his works                         
 and turned it to evil and a name of  horror among  Elves and                         
 Men.                                                                                 
                                                                                     
                                          *                                           
                                                                                     
 1. Many spirits > Many lesser spirits (late change).                                  
 2. the Strong One > the Valiant (late change).                                         
 3. Tavros > Tauros (late change).                                                      
                                                                                     
    Accents were put in throughout the work in ink (the typewriter did not             


60 

    possess them), and in  addition short  marks were  put in  on certain             
    names in this section: Fanturi, Olofantur, Orome, Aldaron, Vana.                  
                                                                                     
                                          1.                                           
                                                                                     
  In the beginning of the overlordship of the Valar they                              
 saw that the world was dark, and light was scattered over                            

 

  the  airs  and  lands  and  seas.  Two  mighty  lamps  they made 
  for the lighting of the world and  set them  on vast  pillars in 
  the  North  and South.  They dwelt  upon an  island in  the seas 
  while they were labouring at their first  tasks in  the ordering 
  of  the  earth.  But  Morgoth  contested  with  them   and  made 
  war.  The  lamps  he overthrew,  and in  the confusion  of dark- 
  ness  he aroused  the sea  against their  island. Then  the Gods 
  removed  into  the  West,  where ever  since  their  seats  have 
  been,  but  Morgoth  escaped,  and  in the  North he  built him- 
  self  a  fortress  and  great caverns  underground. And  at that 
  time  the  Valar  could not  overcome him  or take  him captive. 
  Therefore  they built  then in  the uttermost  West the  land of 
  Valinor.  It  was bordered  by the  Outer Sea,  and the  Wall of 
  the  World  beyond  that  fences  out  the  Void and  the Eldest 
  Dark; but  eastward they  built the  Mountains of  Valinor, that 
  are  highest  upon  earth.  In Valinor  they gathered  all light 
 and  all  things of  beauty, and  built their  many mansions, 
 their  gardens, and  their towers.  Amid most  of the  plain was 
 the  city  of  the  Gods,  Valmar the  beautiful of  many bells. 
 But  Manwe  and  Varda  have  halls  upon  the  highest  of  the 
 Mountains   of  Valinor,   whence  they   can  look  across  the 
 world  even  into  the  East.  Taniquetil  the Elves  named that 
 holy  height,  and   the  Gnomes   Taingwethil,  which   in  the 
 tongue of this island of old was Tindbrenting.                   
    In Valinor Yavanna  planted two  trees in  the wide  plain not 
 far  from the  gates of  Valmar the  blessed. Under  her songs 
 they  yew,  and of  all the  things which  the Gods  made most 
 renown have they, and about their fate all the stories of the 
 world  are  woven.  Dark-green leaves  had one,  that beneath 
 were  shining  silver,  and  white blossoms  like the  cherry it 
 bore,  from  which  a  dew  of  silver  light was  ever falling. 
 Leaves  of  young  green  like  the  new-opened beech  the other 
 had.  Their  edges  were of shining  gold. Yellow  flowers swung 
 upon  its boughs  like the  hanging blossom  of the  merry trees 
  Men now call  Golden Rain.  But from  those flowers  there is- 
  sued  warmth  and  blazing  light.  For  seven  hours  each tree 
  waxed to full glory, and for  seven hours  it waned.'  Each fol- 
  lowed each,  and so  twice every  day in  Valinor there  came an 

 

  hour of softer light, when each tree was  faint and  their gold            
  and silver  radiance was  mingled; for  when white  Silpion for            
  six  hours  had  been  in  bloom,  then golden  Laurelin awoke.            
  But Silpion was the elder of the Trees, and the first hour that            
  ever it shone the Gods did not  count into  the tale  of hours,            
  and called  it the  Hour of  Opening, and from that  hour dated            
  the beginning  of their  reign in  Valinor, and  so at  the sixth            
  hour of  the first  of days  Silpion ceased  its first  time of            
  flower,  and  at  the  twelfth  was  the  first  blossoming  of            
  Laurelin  at  an  end. These  Trees the  Gnomes called  in after            
  times  Bansil  and  Glingol; but  Men have  no names  for them,            
  for  their  light  was slain  before the  coming of  the younger            
  children of Iluvatar upon earth.(2)'                                          
                                                                            
                                      *                                      
                                                                            
  1. This sentence was emended to read: In seven hours  each tree  waxed to 
    full  glory  and  waned  Before  this  emendation,  the text  was confused 
    since periods of both  fourteen and  seven hours  are attributed  to the 
    Trees;  but  the  following  sentence,  beginning Each  followed each... 
    was retyped over erasures that  cannot be  read, and  this no  doubt ex- 
    plains the confusion, which was rectified later by the emendation.        


61 

  2. The typescript page beginning with the words Sea, and the Wall  of the 
    World beyond and continuing to the end  of the  section was  replaced by 
    another. As far as the end of the first paragraph the replacement is al- 
    most identical with  the first,  but with  these differences:  Manwe and 
    Varda  had  hails,  whence  they could  look out;  and new  names appear 
    for Taniquetil:                                                          
                                                                            
       Taniquetil  the  Elves  named that  holy height,  and Ialasse  the Ever- 
       lasting  Whiteness,  and  Tinwenairin  crowned   with  stars,   and  many 
       names  beside;  and  the Gnomes  spake of  it in  their later  tongue as 
       Amon-Uilas;  and  in  the language  of this  island of  old Tindbrenting 
       was its name.                                                         
                                                                            
     The replacement page then coatinues:                                    
                                                                            
       In  Valinor   Yavanna  hallowed   the  mould   with  mighty   song,  and 
       Nienna  watered  it  with  tears.  The  Gods  were  gathered  in  silence 
       upon  their  thrones  of  council  in  the  Ring  of  Doom nigh  unto the 
       golden  gates  of  Valmar the  Blessed; and  Yavanna Palurien  sang be- 
       fore  them,  and  they  watched. From the earth  came forth  two slender 
       shoots; and silence was over all the  world save  for the  slow chanting 

 

  of  Palurien. Under  her songs  two fair  trees uprose  and grew.  Of all 
  things  which  the  Gods  made most  renown have  they, and  about their 
  fate all the tales of  the world  are woven.  Dark-green leaves  had the 
  one, that beneath were  as silver  shining, and  he bore  white blossoms 
  like  the cherry,  from which  a dew  of silver  light was  ever falling, 
  and  earth  was  dappled  with  the  dark  and  dancing  shadows  of his 
  leaves  amid  the  pools  of  gleaming radiance.  Leaves of  young green 
  like the  new-opened beech  the other  bore; their  edges were  of glit- 
  tering  gold.  Yellow  flowers swung  upon her  boughs like  the hanging 
  blossoms  of  the  merry  trees  Men  now  call  Golden-rain;  and  from 
  those flowers there came forth warmth and a great light.                 
    In  seven  hours  the  glory  of  each  tree waxed  to full  and waned 
  again  to  nought;  and  each  awoke to  life an  hour before  the other 
  ceased to shine.  Thus in  Valinor twice  each day  there came  a gentle 
  hour of softer light, when  both Trees  were faint,  and their  gold and 
  silver radiances mingled. Silpion was the elder of  the Trees,  and came 
  first to full stature and to bloom, and that first hour wherein he shone, 
  the  white glimmer  of a  silver dawn,  the Gods  reckoned not  into the 
  tale of  hours, but  named it  the Opening  Hour, and  counted there from 
  the ages of their reign in Valinor. Wherefore at the  sixth hour  of the 
  First of Days, and all the joyous days  thereafter until  the Darkening, 
  Silpion ceased his time of flower, and at the twelfth Lautelin her blos- 
  soming.  These  Trees  the  Gnomes  called  in  after  days  Bansil  and 
  Glingol;  but Men  have no  names for  them, for  their light  was slain 
  before the coming of the younger children of the world.                  
                                                                          
 On the  next page,  and obviously  associated with  this re-              
 placement text, is a  typed table  here represented.  At the              
 bottom of the replaced page, and clearly associated with the              
 emendation given in note 1 above, is a simpler table of pre-              
 cisely similar significance, with the note:                               
                                                                          
 'Day' ends every second waning to nought of  Laurelin or  at end  of sec- 
 ond hour of mingling of light.                                            
                                                                          
                                 2.                                         
                                                                          
   In all this time, since Morgoth overthrew the lamps, the 
 Outer (1) Lands east of the Mountains of Valinor were without 
 light. While the lamps had shown growth began therein, 
 which now was checked because of the darkness. But the 
 oldest of all things already grew upon the world: the great 
 weeds of the sea, and on the earth the dark shade of yew and 

 

  fir and ivy, and small things faint and silent at their feet.' In 
  such  forests  did  Orome  sometimes  hunt,  but  save  Orome and 
  Yavanna  the  Valar  went  not  out  of  Valinor,  while  in  the 


62 

  North  Morgoth  built  his  strength,  and  gathered   his  demon 
  broods   about   him,  whom   the  Gnomes   knew  after   as  the 
  Balrogs  with  whips  of  flame.  The  hordes  of  the   Orcs  he 
  made  of  stone,  but  their  hearts  of hatred. Glamhoth, people 
  of  hate,  the  Gnomes  have  called  them.  Goblins may  they be 
  called,  but  in  ancient  days  they were  strong and  cruel and 
  fell.  Thus  he  held  sway.  Then Varda  looked on  the darkness 
  and  was  moved.  The   silver  light   that  dripped   from  the 
  boughs  of  Silpion  she  hoarded,  and   thence  she   made  the 
  stars. Wherefore  she is  called Tinwetari,  Queen of  Stars, and 
  by  the  Gnomes  Tim-Bridhil.  The unlit  skies she  strewed with 
  these bright globes of silver  flame, and  high above  the North, 
  a  challenge   unto  Morgoth,   she  set   the  crown   of  Seven 
  mighry Stars  to  swing,  the  emblem  of the  Gods, and  sign of 
  Morgoth's  doom.  Many  names  have  these  been  called;  but in 
  the  old  days  of  the  North  both  Elves  and Men  called them 
  the Burning Briar, and some the Sickle of the Gods.               
    It is said that at the making of the stars the children  of the 
  earth  awoke:  the  elder children  of Iluvatar.  Themselves they 
  named  the  Eldar,  whom  we call  the Elves,  but in  the begin- 
  ning  mightier  and  more strong  were they,  yet not  more fair. 
  Orome  it  was  that  found  them,  dwelling  by a  star-lit mere 
  Cuivienen,(3) Water  of  Awakening,  far  in  the  East.  Swift he 
  rode home to  Valinor filled  with the  thought of  their beauty. 
  When  the  Valar  heard  his  tidings  they  pondered  long,  and 
  they  recalled  their  duty.  For  they   came  into   the  world 
  knowing  that  their  office  was  to  govern  it for  the children 
  of  Iluvatar  who  should  after  come,  each  in  the  appointed 
  time.                                                             
    Thus  came  it  that  because  of  the Elves  the Gods  made an 
  assault  upon  the  fortress of  Morgoth in  the North;  and this 
  he  never  forgot.  Little  do  the  Elves  or  Men know  of that 
  great  riding  of the  power of  the West  against the  North and 
  of  the war  and  tumult  of  the  battle of  the Gods.  Tulkas it 

 

                    
                                                              
 was  who  overthrew  Morgoth  and  bound  him   captive,  and 
 the world had peace for a  long age.  But the  fortress which 
 Morgoth  had  built was  hidden with  deceit in  dungeons and 
 caverns far beneath the earth, and the  Gods did  not destroy 
 it utterly, and many  evil things  of Morgoth  lingered there 
 still, or dared to roam in the secret pathways of the world. 
  Morgoth  the  Gods  drew  back  to  Valinor  in  chains, and 
 he  was  set in  prison in  the great  halls of  Mandos, from 
 which  none,  God,  Elf,  nor  Man has  ever escaped  save by 
 the will of the Valar. Vast they are and strong, and built in 
 the North of the land  of Valinor.  The Eldalie,'  the people 
 of the Elves, the Gods invited to Valinor,  for they  were in 
 love with the beauty of  that race,  and because  they feared 
 for them in the starlit dusk, and knew  not what  deceits and 
 evil wrought by Morgoth still wandered there.                 
  Of their own free will,  yet in  awe of  the power  and maj- 
 esty of the Gods, the Elves obeyed.  A great  march therefore 
 they prepared from their first  homes in  the East.  When all 
 was  ready  Orome  rode at  their head  upon his  white horse 
 shod with gold. Into  three hosts  were the  Eldalie arrayed. 
 The  first  to  march  forth were  led by  that most  high of 
 all  the elfin  race, whose  name was  Ingwe, Lord  of Elves. 
 Ing  the  Gnomes  now  make  his  name,  but  never  came  he 
 back into the Outer Lands until these  tales were  near their 
 end.'  The  Quendi'  were  his  own  folk  called,  who some- 
 times are alone called  Elves; they  are the  Light-elves and 
 the  beloved  of  Manwe  and  his   spouse.  Next   came  the 
 Noldoli.  The  Gnomes  we  may  call  them,  a  name  of wis- 
 dom; they are the Deep-elves,  and on  that march  their lord 
 was  the  mighty  Finwe, whom  his own  folk in  their tongue 
 later changed call Finn.' His kindred  are renowned  in elfin 
 song, and of them  these tales  have much  to tell,  for they 


63 

 warred and laboured long and  sore in  the Northern  lands of 
 old.  Third  came  the  Teleri.  The  Foamriders may  they be 
 called; they are the Sea-elves, and the Solosimpi (9) they were 
 named in Valinor, the pipers  of the  shores.(10) Elwe (or Elu) 
 was their lord "                                              

 

 

                                                                             
   Many  of  the  elfin  race  were  lost  upon  the  long dark               
 roads,  and  they  wandered  in  the  woods  and  mountains of               
 the world, and never came to  Valinor, nor  saw the  light of               
 the  Two  Trees.  Therefore  they  are  called  Ilkorindi, the               
 Elves that dwelt never in Cor, the  city of  the Eldar  in the               
 land  of  the  Gods. The  Dark-elves are  they, and  many are               
 their scattered tribes, and many are their tongues.                          
   Of  the  Dark-elves  the  chief in  renown was  Thingol. For               
 this reason he came  never to  Valinor. Melian  was a  fay. In               
 the gardens of Lorien she dwelt, and among all his fair folk               
 none  were  there  that  surpassed her  beauty, nor  none more               
 wise,  nor  none  more  skilled  in  magical  and  enchanting               
 song. It is  told that  the Gods  would leave  their business,               
 and  the  birds of  Valinor their  mirth, that  Valmar's bells               
 were silent, and  the fountains  ceased to  flow, when  at the               
 -mingling of the light Melian sang in the  gardens of  the God               
 '  of  Dreams. Nightingales  went always  with her,  and their               
 song  she  taught  them. But  she loved  deep shadow,  and of-               
 ten strayed on long journey into the  Outer Lands,  and there               
 filled the silence of the  dawning world  with her  voice and               
 the voices of her birds.                                                    
   The  nightingales  of  Melian  Thingol  heard  and  was  en-               
 chanted, and left his folk. Melian he found beneath  the trees               
 and was cast into a dream and a great  slumber, so  that his               
 people  sought  him  in  vain.  In  after  days  Melian  and               
 Thingol  became  Queen and  King of  the woodland  Elves of               
 Doriath;  and  Thingol's  halls  were  called  the  Thousand               
 Caves.                                                                     
                                                                             
                                      *                                       
                                                                             
   1. At all three occurrences of Outer Lands in this section Hither is writ- 
    ten above Outer (which is not struck out).                                
   2. After at their feet is added: and in their thickets dark  creatures, old 
    and strong.                                                                
   3. Cuivienen > Kuivienen                                                     
   4. the battle > the first battle                                             
   5. Written against Eldalie: Quendi (late change).                            

 

  6. This  sentence,  beginning  Ing the  Gnomes now  make his  name, was 
  changed to read:                                                        
                                                                         
    He entered into Valinor and sits  at the  feet of  the Powers,  and all 
    Elves  revere his  name, but  he hath  come never  back into  the Outer 
    Lands.                                                                
                                                                         
 7. Quendi > Lindar (late change).                                         
 8. whom his own folk in their tongue later changed call Finn > wisest 
  of all the children of the world                                        
 9. Solosimpi > Soloneldi                                                  
 10. the pipers of the shores > for they made music beside the breaking 
  waves.                                                                  
 11. Elwe {or Elu) was their lord > Elwe was their lord, and his hair was 
  long and white.                                                         
 12. Cor > Kor                                                            
                                                                         
  Short marks were written in on the names Eldalie, Teleri.                 
                                                                         
                                    3.                                    
                                                                         
 In time the hosts of  the Eldar  came to  the last  shores of            


64 

 the West.' In the North these  shores in  the ancient  days             
 sloped ever westward, until in the northernmost parts of the             
 Earth only  a narrow  sea divided  the land  of the  Gods from           
 the Outer' Lands; but this narrow sea was filled  with grind-            
 ing ice, because of the violence of the frosts of Morgoth. At            
 that place where the elfin hosts first looked upon the sea in            
 wonder a wide dark ocean stretched between them and the                  
 Mountains  of  Valinor.  Over the  waves they  gazed waiting;            
 and Ulmo, sent by  the Valar,  uprooted the  half-sunk island            
 upon which the Gods had  first had  their dwelling,  and drew            
 it to  the western  shores. Thereon  he embarked  the Quendi (3)         
 and the Noldoli, for they had arrived  first, but  the Teleri            
 were behind and did not come until he had gone. The                      
 Quendi and the Noldoli he bore  thus to  the long  shores be-            
 neath the  Mountains of  Valinor, and  they entered  the land            
 of the Gods, and were welcomed to its glory and its bliss.               
 The Teleri thus dwelt long by the shores of the sea awaiting             
 Ulmo's  return,  and  they  grew  to love  the sea,  and made            
 songs filled with the sound of  it. And  Osse loved  them and            

 

 the  music  of  their  voices,  and sitting  upon the  rocks he 
 spoke  to them.  Great therefore  was his  grief when  Ulmo re- 
 turned at length  to take  them to  Valinor. Some  he persuaded 
 '  to remain  on the  beaches of  the world,  but the  most em- 
 barked  upon  the  isle  and  were  drawn  far away.  Then Osse 
 followed them, and in rebellion, it is said, he seized the isle 
 and  chained  it  to  the  sea-bottom  far  out  in the  Bay of 
 Faerie,  whence  the  Mountains  of  Valinor  could  but  dimly 
 be descried, and the light of the  realms beyond  that filtered 
 through the passes of  the hills.  There it  stood for  many an 
 age.  No  other  land was  near to  it, and  it was  called Tol 
 Eressea, or the Lonely Isle. There long  the Teleri  dwelt, and 
 learned  strange  music of  Osse, who  made the  seabirds for 
 their delight. Of this  long sojourn  apart came  the sundering 
 of the tongue of the Foamriders and the Elves of Valinor.       
   To  the  other  Elves  the  Valar gave  a home  and dwelling. 
 Because  even  among  the  Tree-lit  gardens  of the  Gods they 
   , longed at whiles to see the stars, a gap was made in the 
   : encircling mountains, and there in a deep valley that ran 
   down to the sea the green hill of Cor' was raised. From the 
   West the Trees shone upon it; to the East it looked out to 
      the Bay of Faerie and the Lonely Isle and the Shadowy      
    Seas. Thus some of the blessed light of Valinor came into 
 , the lands without,  and fell  upon the  Lonely Isle,  and its 
 , western shore grew green  and fair.  There bloomed  the first 
 flowers  that  ever  were east  of the  mountains of  the Gods. 
 On  the  top  of  Cor  the  city  of the  Elves was  built, the 
 . white walls and towers and  terraces of  Tun. The  highest of 
 those  towers  was  the  tower  of  Ing,(5) whose  silver  lamp 
 shone far out into the mists of the sea, but few are  the ships 
 of  mortals  that  have  ever seen  its marvellous  beam. There 
 dwelt  the  Elves  and  Gnomes.  Most   did  Manwe   and  Varda 
 love  the  Quendi,  the  Light-elves,'  and  holy  and immortal 
 were all  their  deeds  and  songs.  The  Noldoli,   the  Deep- 
 elves,  that  Men  call Gnomes,  were beloved  of Aule,  and of 
 Mandos the wise;  and great  was their  craft, their  magic and 
 their skill, but ever greater their  thirst for  knowledge, and 
 their  desire  to  make  things wonderful  and new.  In Valinor 

 

 of their  skill they  first made  gems, and  they made  them in 
 countless myriads, and filled all  Tun with  them, and  all the 
 halls of the Gods were enriched.'                              
   Since  the  Noldoli  afterwards  came  back  into  the  Great 
 Lands,  and  these  tales  tell  mostly  of  them, here  may be 
 said, using  the names  in form  of Gnomish  tongue as  it long 
 was  spoken  on  the  earth,  that  King  of  the   Gnomes  was 
 Finn.'  His  sons  were  Feanor,  Fingolfin,  and   Finrod.  Of 
 these Feanor was the most skilful, the deepest  in lore  of all 
 his  race;  Fingolfin  the mightiest  and most  valiant; Finrod 


65 

 the  fairest  and  most  wise  of  heart.  The  seven  sons  of 
 Feanor   were  Maidros   the  tall;   Maglor  a   musician  and 
 mighty  singer  whose  voice  carried  far  over hill  and sea; 
 Celegorm the fair, Curufin the  crafty, the  heir of  well nigh 
 all his father's skill, and Cranthir the dark; the  last Damrod 
 and  Diriel,  who  after  were  great  hunters  in  the  world, 
 though  not  more  than  Celegorm  the  fair,  the   friend  of 
 Orome.  The  sons  of  Fingolfin  were  Finweg,  o who  was af- 
 ter  king  of  the  Gnomes  in  the  North  of  the  world, and 
 Turgon  of  Gondolin;  and  his daughter  was Isfin  the White. 
 The  sons  of  Finrod  were  Felagund,  Orodreth,  Angrod, and. 
 Egnor.                                                         
                                                               
   In those far  days Feanor  began on  a time  a long  and mar- 
 vellous labour, and all his power and all  his subtle  magic he 
 called upon, for he  purposed to  make a  thing more  fair than 
 any of  the Eldar  yet had  made, that  should last  beyond the 
 end   of   all.   Three   jewels  he   made,  and   named  them 
 Silmarils.  A  living   fire  burned   within  them   that  was 
 blended of the light of the  Two Trees;  of their  own radiance 
 they  shone  even  in the  dark; no  mortal flesh  impure could 
 touch  them,  but   was  withered   and  was   scorched.  These 
 jewels the Elves prized beyond  all the  works of  their hands, 
 and  Manwe  hallowed  them, and  Varda said:  'The fate  of the 
 Elves is locked herein, and  the fate  of many  things beside.' 
 The  heart  of  Feanor was  wound about  the things  he himself 
 had made.                                                      
   Now it must be  told that  the Teleri  seeing afar  the light 

 

 of Valinor were torn between desire to see again their kin- 
 dred and to look upon the splendour of the Gods, and love 
 of the music of the sea. Therefore Ulmo taught them the 
 craft of shipbuilding, and Osse, yielding to Ulmo at last, 
 brought to them as his last gift the strong-winged swans. 
 Their fleet of white ships they harnessed to the swans of 
 Osse, and thus were drawn without help of the winds to 
 Valinor. There they dwelt upon the long shores of Fairy- 
 land, and could see the light of the Trees, and could visit 
 the golden streets of Valmar, and the crystal stairs of Tun, 
 if they wished - but most they sailed the waters of the Bay 
 of Faerie and danced in those bright waves whose crests 
 gleamed in the light beyond the hill. Many jewels the other 
 Eldar gave to them, opals and diamonds and pale crystals 
 that they strewed upon the pools and sands. Many pearls 
 they made, and halls of pearl, and of pearls were the man- 
 sions of Elwe at the Haven of the Swans. That was their 
 chief town, and their harbour. A marvellous arch of living 
 rock sea-carven was its gate, and it lay upon the confines 
 of Fairyland, north of the pass of Cor. 
                                                                
                                      *                                    
                                                                          
 1. the last shores of the West > the last western shores of the Hither 
    Lands.                                                                 
 2. Hither written above Outer (see $2 note 1).                            
 3. Quendi > Lindar at all three occurrences (late change; cf. $2.note 7). 
 4. Cor > KOr at both occurrences (as in $2).                              
 5. Ing > Ingwe (see $2 note 6).                                          
 6. Light-elves > High-elves, and later to Fair-elves.                     
 7. On a separate slip is the following passage in manuscript without pre- 
    cise direction for its insertion, but which seems best placed here: 
                                                                          
      But the love of the outer earth and  stars remained  in the  hearts of 
      the Noldoli, and they abode there ever  and in  the hills  and valleys 
      about the city. But the Lindar after a while grew  to love  rather the 
      wide plains and the full light of Valinor, and  they forsook  Tun, and 
      came seldom back; and  the Noldoli  became a  separate folk  and their 
      king  was Finwe.  Yet none  dwelt in  the tower  of Ingwe  nor... save 
      such  as  tended  that  unfailing  lamp,  and Ingwe  was held  ever as 


66 

      high-king of all the Eldalie.                                        

 

                                                            
                                                                
  8. Hither written above Great.                                  
  9. Finn > Finwe (see $2 note 8).                                
 10. Finweg > Fingon.                                             
                                                                
    Now it may be told how the Gods were beguiled by             
 Morgoth. This was the high tide of the glory and the bliss      
 of Gods and Elves, the noontide of the Blessed Realm.           
 Seven' ages as the Gods decreed had Morgoth dwelt in the        
 halls of Mandos, each age in lightened pain. When seven         
 ages had passed, as they had promised, he was brought be-       
 fore their conclave. He looked upon the glory of the Valar, 
 and greed and malice was in his heart; he looked upon the       
 fair children of the Eldalie that sat at the knees of the Gods, 
 and hatred filled him; he looked upon their wealth of jewels 
 and lusted for them; but his thoughts he hid and his ven-       
 geance he postponed.                                            
    There Morgoth humbled himself before the feet of             
 Manwe and sought for pardon; but they would not suffer          
 him to depart from their sight and watchfulness. A humble       
 dwelling he was granted in Valinor within the gates of the      
 city, and so fair-seeming were all his deeds and words that     
 after a while he was allowed to go freely about all the land. 
 Only Ulmo's heart misgave him, and Tulkas clenched his          
 hands whenever he saw Morgoth his foe go by. Never has          
 Tulkas the strong forgotten or forgiven a wrong done to         
 himself or his. Most fair of all was Morgoth to the Elves       
 and he aided them in many works, if they would let him.         
 The people of Ing,(2) the Quendi,(3) held him in suspicion, for     
 Ulmo had warned them and they had heeded his words. But         
 the Gnomes took delight in the many things of hidden and        
 secret wisdom that he could tell to them, and some hark-        
 ened to things which it had been better that they had never     
 heard. And when he saw his chance he sowed a seed of lies       
 and suggestions of evil among such as these. Bitterly did       
 the folk of the Noldoli atone for it in after days. Often he 
 would whisper that the Gods had brought the Eldar to            
 Valinor but out of jealousy, for fear their marvellous skill    

 

 and  beauty  and  their  magic  should  grow too  strong for 
 them,  as  they waxed  and spread  over the  wide lands  of the 
 world.  Visions  he  would  set  before  them  of   the  mighty 
 realms  they  might  have  ruled  in power  and freedom  in the 
 East. In those days, moreover, the Valar knew of the com- 
 ing of Men that were to be; but the Elves knew nought of 
 this, for the Gods had not revealed it, and the time was not 
 yet near. But Morgoth spoke in secret to the Elves of mor- 
 tals, though little of the truth he knew or cared. Manwe 
 alone knew aught clearly of the mind of Iluvatar concerning 
 Men, and ever has he been their friend. Yet Morgoth whis- 
 pered that the Gods kept the Eldar captive so that Men 
 coming should defraud them of their kingdoms, for the 
 weaker race of mortals would be more easily swayed by 
 them. Little truth was there in this, and little have the Valar 
 ever prevailed to sway the wills or fates of Men, and least 
 of all to good. Yet many of the Elves believed or half- 
 believed his evil words. Gnomes were the most of these. Of 
 the Teleri there were none. 
   Thus, ere the Gods were aware, the peace of Valinor was 
 poisoned. The Gnomes began to murmur against the Valar 
 and their kindred, and they became filled with vanity, and 
 forgot all that the Gods had given them and taught them. 
 Most of all did Morgoth fan the flames of the fierce and 
 eager heart of Feanor, though all the while he lusted for the 
 Silmarils. These Feanor at great feasts wore on brow and 
 breast, but at other times, locked fast in the hoards of Tun, 


67 

 they were guarded close, though them were no thieves in 
 Valinor, as yet. Proud were the sons of Finn,4 and the 
 proudest Feanor. Lying Morgoth said to him that Fingolfin 
 and his sons were plotting to usurp the leadership of Feanor 
 and his sons, and supplant them in the favour of their fa- 
 ther and of the Gods. Of these words were quarrels born 
 between the children of Finn, and of those quarrels came 
 the end of the high days of Valinor and the evening of its 
 ancient glory.(5) 
           Feanor was summoned before the council of the Gods, 
 and there were the lies of Morgoth laid bare for all to see 

 

 who  had  the  will.  By  the  judgement  of  the  Gods  Feanor 
 was  banished  from  Tun. But  with him  went Finn  his father 
 who loved him more than his other sons, and many other         
 Gnomes. Northward in Valinor in the hills near the halls of 
 Mandos they built a treasury and a stronghold; but             
 Fingolfin  ruled  the  Noldoli  in  Tun.  Thus  might Morgoth's 
 words  seem  justified, and  the bitterness  he sowed  went on, 
 though his lies were disproved, and long  after it  lived still 
 between the sons of Fingolfin and of Feanor.(6)                 
   Straight from the midst of their council the Gods sent       
 Tulkas  to  lay  hands  on  Morgoth and  bring him  before them 
 in chains once more. But he escaped through the pass of         
 Cor,  and  from  the tower  of Ing  the Elves  saw him  pass in 
 thunder and in wrath.                                          
   Thence  he  came  into  that  region   that  is   called  Arvalin, 
 which lies south of  the Bay  of Faerie,  and beneath  the very 
 eastern feet of the mountains of  the Gods,  and there  are the 
 shadows the thickest  in all  the world.  There secret  and un- 
 known  dwelt  Ungoliant,  Gloomweaver,  in  spider's   form.  It 
 is  not  told  whence she  is, from  the outer  darkness, maybe, 
 that  lies  beyond  the  Walls  of  the World.  In a  ravine she 
 lived,  and  spun  her  webs  in  a  cleft  of  the  mountains, and 
 sucked up  light and  shining things  to spin  them forth  again 
 in  nets  of  black  and  choking gloom  and clinging  fog. Ever 
 she  hungered  for  more  food.  There  Morgoth  met   her,  and 
 with  her  plotted  his  revenge.  But  terrible  was  the  reward 
 that he must promise her, ere she would dare the perils ofd      
 Valinor or the power of the Gods.                              
   A  great  darkness  she  wove  about her  to protect  her, and 
 then  from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle  she   swung  on   her  black 
 ropes,  until  she  had  scaled  the  highest  places of  the moun- 
 tains. In the south of Valinor was this, for there lay  the wild 
 woods  of Orome,  and there  was little  watch, since,  far from 
 the  old  fortress  of  Morgoth  in the  North, the  great walls 
 there  looked  on  untrodden  lands  and  empty  sea. On  a lad- 
 der  that  she  made   Morgoth  climbed,   and  he   looked  down 
 upon the shining plain, seeing afar off the domes of Valinor 

 

 in the mingling of the light; and he laughed as he sped 
 down the long western slopes with ruin in his heart. 
   So came evil into Valinor. Silpion was waning fast and 
 Laurelin but just begun to glow, when protected by fate 
 Morgoth and Ungoliant crept unawares into the plain. With 
 his black sword Morgoth stabbed each tree to its very core, 
 and as their juices spouted forth Ungoliant sucked them up, 
 and poison from her foul lips went into their tissues and 
 withered them, leaf and branch and root. Slowly they suc- 
 cumbed, and their light grew dim, while Ungoliant belched 
 forth black clouds and vapours as she drank their radiance. 
 To monstrous form she swelled. 
   Then fell wonder and dismay on all in Valmar, when twi- 
 light and mounting gloom came on the land. Black vapours 
 floated about the ways of the city. Varda looked down from 
 Taniquetil and saw the trees and towers all hidden as in a 
 mist. Too late they ran from hill and gate. The Trees died 
 and shone no more, while wailing throngs stood round 
 them and called on Manwe to come down. Out upon the 


68 

 plain the horses of Orome thundered with a hundred 
 hooves, and fire started in the gloom about their feet. 
 Swifter than they ran Tulkas on before, and the light of the 
 anger of his eyes was as a beacon. But they found not what 
 they sought. Wherever Morgoth went a darkness and confu- 
 sion was around him that Ungoliant made, so that feet were 
 bewildered and search was blind. 
   This was the time of the Darkening of Valinor. In that 
 day there stood before the gates of Valmar Gnomes that 
 cried aloud. Bitter were their tidings. They told how 
 Morgoth had fled North and with him was a great black 
 shape, a spider of monstrous form it had seemed in the 
 gathering night. Sudden he had fallen on the treasury of 
 Finn. There he slew the king of the Gnomes before his 
 doors, and spilled the first elfin blood and stained the land 
 of Valinor. Many others too he slew, but Feanor and his 
 sons were not there. Bitterly they cursed the chance, for 
 Morgoth took the Silmarils and all the wealth of the jewels 
 of the Noldoli that were hoarded there. 

 

   Little is known of the paths or journeys of Morgoth after       
 that terrible deed; but this is known to all, that escaping from       
 the hunt he came at last with Ungoliant over the Grinding              
 Ice and so into the northern lands of this world. There                
 Ungoliant summoned him to give her the promised reward.               
 The half of her pay had been the sap of the Trees of Light,             
 The other half was a full share in the plundered jewels. Mor-           
 goth yielded these up, and she devoured them, and their                  
 light perished from the earth, and still more huge grew                
 Ungoliant's dark and hideous form. But no share in the                 
 Silmarils would Morgoth give. Such was the first thieves'              
 quarrel.                                                               
   So mighty had Ungoliant become that she enmeshed                     
 Morgoth in her choking nets, and his awful cry echoed                  
 through the shuddering world. To his aid came the Orcs and             
 Balrogs that lived yet in the lowest places of Angband.                
 With their whips of flame the Balrogs smote the webs asun-             
 der, but Ungoliant was driven away into the uttermost                  
 South, where she long dwelt.                                           
   Thus came Morgoth back to Angband, and there count-                  
 less became the number of the hosts of his Orcs and de-                
 mons.' He forged for himself a great crown of iron, and he       
 called himself the king of the world. In sign of this he set           
 the three Silmarils in his crown. It is said that his evil             
 hands were burned black with the touch of those holy and               
 enchanted things, and black they have ever been since, nor             
 was he ever afterward free from the pain of the burning,               
 and the anger of the pain. That crown he never took from               
 his head, and it never was his wont to leave the deep dun-             
 geons of his fortress, but he governed his vast armies from            
 his northern throne.                                                   
                                                                       
                                    *                                   
                                                                       
 1. Nine written above Seven but then struck out.                    
 2. Ing > Ingwe at both occurrences, as previously.                  
 3. Quendi > Lindar, as previously (late change).                        
 4. Finn > Finwe at all occurrences (except once where overlooked), 
    previously.                                                        

 

  
                                                                                
 5. The following was added here later faintly in pencil:                          
                                                                                
        And  Feanor  spoke  words of  rebellion against  the Gods  and plotted 
        to  depart  from Valinor  back into  the outer  world and  deliver the 
        Gnomes, as he said, from thraldom.                                        
                                                                                
 6. The following was added here in the same way and at the same time           


69 

     as the passage given in note 5:                                             
                                                                                
        But  Morgoth  hid  himself  and  none  knew whither  he had  gone. And 
        while  the  Gods were  in council,  for they  feared that  the shadows 
        should  lengthen  in  Valinor,  a messenger  came and  brought tidings 
        that Morgoth  was in  the North  of the  land, journeying  towards the 
        house of Finwe.                                                          
                                                                                
 7 Cor > Kor, as previously.                                                     
                                                                                
     8 Written here later is the direction: Here mention making of Orcs (p. 4). 
     Page 4 of  the typescript  contains the  sentence (p.  100) The  hordes of 
     the Orcs he made of stone, but their hearts of hatred See p. 352.            
                                                                                
                                                5.                               
                                                                                
   When it became at last all too clear that Morgoth had es-                     
   caped,  the  Gods  assembled  about the  dead Trees  and sat                     
   there in darkness for a long while in dumb silence, and 
   mourned in their hearts. Now that day which Morgoth chose 
   for this assault was a day of high festival throughout Valinor. 
   On this day it was the custom of the chief Valar, all save 
   Osse who seldom came thither, and of many of the Elves, 
   especially the people of Ing,(1) to climb the long winding 
   paths in white-robed procession to Manwe's halls on the 
   summit of Tindbrenting. All the Quendi and many of the 
   Gnomes, who under Fingolfin still lived in Tun, were there- 
   fore on Tindbrenting's height and were singing before the 
   feet of Varda, when the watchers from afar beheld the fading 
   of the Trees. But most of the Gnomes were in the plain, and 
   all the Teleri, as was their wont, were on the shore. The fogs 
   and darkness now drifted in from off the sea through the 
   pass of Cor,(3) as the Trees died. A murmur of dismay ran 
   through all Elfland, and the Foamriders wailed beside the 
   sea. 

 

   Then  Feanor  rebelling  against  his   banishment  summoned 
 all  the  Gnomes  to  Tun.  A vast  concourse gathered  in the 
 great square on the top of the hill of Cor, and it was  lit by 
 the light of many  torches which  each one  that came  bore in 
 hand.                                                         
   Feanor  was  a  great  orator  with   a  power   of  moving 
 words. A very  wild and  terrible speech  he made  before the 
 Gnomes  that  day,  and  though  his  anger  was  most against 
 Morgoth,  yet  his  words  were  in  great  part the  fruit of 
 Morgoth's lies. But he was distraught with  grief for  his fa- 
 ther  and  wrath  for  the  rape  of  the  Silmarils.  He  now 
 claimed  the  kingship  of  all  the  Gnomes, since  Finn (4) was 
 dead,  in  spite of  the decree  of the  Gods. 'Why  should we 
 obey  the  jealous Gods  any longer,'  he asked,  'who cannot, 
 even  keep  their  own  realm  from  their  foe?' He  bade the 
 Gnomes prepare  for flight  in the  darkness, while  the Valar 
 were  still  wrapped  in  mourning;  to  seek  freedom  in the 
 world  and  of their  own prowess  to win  there a  new realm, 
 since  Valinor  was no  longer more  bright and  blissful than 
 the  lands  outside;  to  seek  out Morgoth  and war  with him 
 for ever until  they were  avenged. Then  he swore  a terrible 
 oath. His seven sons  leaped to  his side  and took  the self- 
 same  vow  together, each  with drawn  sword. They  swore the: 
 unbreakable oath, by  the   name  of   Manwe  and   Varda  and 
 the  holy  mountain,(5) to  pursue with  hate and  vengeance to 
 the  ends  of  the  world  Vala,  Demon,   Elf,  or   Man,  or Orc 
 who hold or take or keep a Silmaril against their will.       
   Fingolfin  and  his  son  Finweg'  spake against  Feanor, and 
 wrath  and  angry  words   came  near   to  blows;   but  Finrod 
 spoke  and  sought  to  calm  them,  though  of his  sons only 
 Felagund  was  on   his  side.   Orodreth,  Angrod,   and  Egnor 
 took the part of Feanor. In the end it was put  to the  vote of 
 the assembly, and moved  by the  potent words  of Feanor  the 


70 

 Gnomes  decided  to  depart.  But  the  Gnomes  of   Tun  would 
 not renounce the kingship  of Fingolfin,  and as  two divided. 
 hosts therefore they set  forth: one  under Fingolfin  who with 
 his sons yielded to the general  voice against  their wisdom, 
 because they would not desert their people; the other under 

 

  Feanor.   Some   remained  behind.   Those  were   the  Gnomes 
  who  were  with  the  Quendi  upon  Tindbrenting. It  was long 
  ere they  came back  into this  tale of  the wars  and wander- 
  ings of their people.                                          
    The Teleri would not join that flight.  Never had  they lis- 
  tened to  Morgoth. They  desired no  other cliffs  nor beaches 
  than  the  strands  of  Fairyland.  But  the Gnomes  knew that 
  they  could  not  escape  without  boats  and ships,  and that 
  there  was  no time  to build.  They must  cross the  seas far 
  to  the  North  where  they were  narrower, but  further still 
  feared  to  venture;  for  they had  heard of  Helkarakse, the 
  Strait of the Grinding Ice, where the great frozen  hills ever 
  shifted and broke,  sundered and  clashed together.  But their 
  white ships with white sails the Teleri would not  give, since 
  they prized  them dearly,  and dreaded  moreover the  wrath of 
  the Gods.                                                      
    Now it is told that the hosts of Feanor marched  forth first 
  along  the  coast  of.  Valinor;  then  came  the   people  of 
  Fingolfin less eager, and in the rear of this host were Finrod 
  and  Felagund  and  many  of  the noblest  and fairest  of the 
  Noldoli.  Reluctantly  they  forsook  the  walls  of  Tun, and 
  more than  others they  carried thence  memories of  its bliss 
  and beauty, and  even many  fair things  made there  by hands. 
  Thus the people of  Finrod had  no part  in the  dreadful deed 
  that then was done, and  not all  of Fingolfin's  folks shared 
 in it; yet  all the  Gnomes that  departed from  Valinor came 
 under  the  curse  that  followed.  When  the  Gnomes  came  to 
 the  Haven  of  the  Swans  they  attempted  to seize  by force 
 the white fleets that lay anchored there.  A bitter  affray was 
 fought  upon  the great  arch of  the gate  and on  the lamplit 
 quays and piers, as is  sadly told  in the  song of  the Flight 
 of  the  Gnomes.  Many were  slain on  either side,  but fierce 
 and  desperate were  the hearts  of the  people of  Feanor, and 
 they won  the battle;  and with  the help  beside of  many even 
 of  the  Gnomes  of  Tun  they  drew  away  the  ships  of  the 
 Teleri,  and manned  their oars  as best  they might,  and took 
 them north along the coast.                                     
    After  they  had  journeyed  a  great way  and were  come to 

 

  the  northern  confines  of  the  Blessed  Realm, they  beheld a 
  dark  figure  standing  high upon  the cliffs.  Some say  it was 
  a  messenger,  others  that  it  was  Mandos  himself.  There he 
  spoke  in  a loud  dread voice  the curse  and prophecy  that is 
  called  the  Prophecy  of  Mandos,'   warning  them   to  return 
  and seek for pardon, or in the end to return only at  last after 
  sorrow  and  endless  misery.  Much  he  foretold  in  the  dark 
  words,  which  only  the  wisest of  them understood,  of things 
  that  after  befell;  but all  heard the  curse he  uttered upon 
  those  that  would  not  stay,  because  they  had  at Swanhaven 
  spilled the blood of their kindred, and fought the  first battle 
  between  the  children  of  earth  unrighteously. For  that they 
  should  suffer  in all  their wars  and councils  from treachery 
  and  from  the  fear  of  treachery  among  their  own  kindred. 
  But  Feanor  said:  'He  saith  not  that  we shall  suffer from 
  cowardice,  from  cravens  or  the  fear  of cravens',  and that 
  proved true.(8)                                                  
    All  too  soon  did  the  evil  begin   to  work.   They  came 
  at last far to the North and saw the first teeth of the ice that 
  floated  in  the  sea.  Anguish they  had of  the cold.  Many of 
  the  Gnomes   murmured,  especially   of  those   that  followed 
  less eagerly under  the banners  of Fingolfin.  So it  came into 
  the  heart  of Feanor  and his  sons to  sail off  suddenly with 
  all the ships, of  which they  had the  mastery, and  'leave the 


71 

  grumblers  to  grumble,  or whine  their way  back to  the cages 
  of  the  Gods.'  Thus  began  the  curse   of  the   slaying  at 
  Swanhaven.  When  Feanor  and  his  folk  landed  on  the shores 
  in the West of the northern world,  they set  fire in  the ships 
  and made  a great  burning terrible  and bright;  and Fingolfin 
  and  his  people  saw  the light  of it  in the  sky. Thereafter 
  those  left  behind  wandered  miserably,  and  were  joined by 
  the companies of Finrod that marched up after.                   
    In  the  end  in  woe  and  weariness  Finrod  led  some  back 
  to  Valinor  and  the  pardon  of the  Gods -  for they  were not 
  at  Swanhaven  -  but   the  sons   of  Finrod   and  Fingolfin (9) 
  would not  yield, having  come so  far. They  led their  host far 
  into the bitterest North, and  dared at  last the  Grinding Ice. 
  Many  were  lost  there  wretchedly,  and  there was  small love 

 

                                                              
                                                                             
 for the sons of Feanor in the hearts of those that came at                   
 last by this perilous passage into the Northern lands.                       
                                                                             
                                      *                                       
                                                                             
   1. Ing > Ingwe, as previously.                                              
   2. At neither of the occurrences of Quendi is the name changed, as pre- 
   viously, to Lindar, clearly through oversight.                             
 3 Cor > Kor at both occurrences, as previously.                              
 4 Finn not emended to Finwe as previously, through oversight.                
 5 This sentence was rewritten:                                               
                                                                             
         They swore an oath which none  shall break,  and none  should take, 
         by the name  of the  Allfather, calling  the Everlasting  Dark upon 
         them, if they kept it  not, and  Manwe they  named in  witness, and 
         Varda, and the Holy Mount, vowing                                    
                                                                             
 6. Finweg > Fingon, as in $3, note 10.                                     
 7. Prophecy of Mandos > Prophecy of the North                                 
 8. Here is written lightly in pencil: Finrod returned.                        
 9. the sons of  Finrod and  Fingolfin >  Fingolfin and  the sons  of Finrod. 
    (This emendation was  made, I  think, simply  for clarity,  the original 
    text having been intended  to mean  'the sons  of Finrod,  together with 
    Fingolfin': for  Fingolfin, not  his son  Finweg/Fingon, has  become the 
    leader of the hosts across the Grinding Ice, since Finrod is now the one 
    who returned to Valinor - see the commentary on S $5, pp. 55 - 6.)        
                                                                             
                                      6.                                      
                                                                             
   When  the  Gods  heard  of  the flight  of the  Gnomes they                
 were  aroused  from  their  grief.  Manwe  summoned  then  to                
 his council Yavanna; and she put forth all her power,  but it                
 availed not to heal the Trees. Yet beneath her spells Silpion                
 bore at last one great and single silver bloom,  and Laurelin                
 a great golden fruit. Of these, as is said in the song of the                
 Sun  and  Moon,  the  Gods  fashioned  the  great   lamps  of                
 heaven,  and  set them  to sail  appointed courses  above the                
 world. Rana  they named  the Moon,  and Ur  the Sun;  and the                
 maiden  who guided  the galleon  of the  sun was  Urien,(1) and                
 the youth who  steered the  floating island  of the  Moon was                
 Tilion.  Urien  was  a  maiden  who  had  tended  the  golden                
 flowers in the gardens of Vana,  while still  joy was  in the                

 

 Blissful Realm, and Nessa daughter of Vana (2) danced on          
 the lawns of never-fading green. Tilion was a hunter from      
 the company of Orome, and he had a silver bow. Often he        
 wandered from his course pursuing the stars upon the heav- 
 enly fields.                                                   
   At first the Gods purposed that the Sun and Moon should      
 sail from Valinor to the furthest East, and back again, each 
 following the other to and fro across the sky. But because 
 of the waywardness of Tilion and his rivalry with Urien,       


72 

 and most because of the words of Lorien and Nienna, who        
 said that they had banished all sleep and night and peace      
 from the earth, they changed their design. The Sun and         
 Moon were drawn by Ulmo or his chosen spirits through          
 the caverns and grottoes at the roots of the world, and       
 mounted then in the East, and sailed back to Valinor, into 
 which the Sun descended each day at time of Evening. And       
 so is Evening the time of greatest light and joy in the land 
 of the Gods, when the Sun sinks down to rest beyond the        
 rim of earth upon the cool bosom of the Outer Sea. Tilion      
 was bidden not to mount until Urien was fallen from the        
 sky, or far had journeyed to the West, and so it is that they 
 are now but seldom seen in the heaven together.                
   Still therefore is the light of Valinor more great and fair 
 than that of other lands, because there the Sun and Moon      
 together rest a while before they go upon their dark journey 
 under the world, but their light is not the light which came 
 from the Trees before ever Ungoliant's poisonous lips          
 touched them. That light lives now only in the Silmarils.      
 Gods and Elves therefore look forward yet to a time when  
 the Magic Sun and Moon, which are the Trees, may be re-        
 kindled and the bliss and glory of old return. Ulmo foretold 
 to them that this would only come to pass by the aid, frail 
 though it might seem, of the second race of earth, the youn- 
 ger children of Iluvatar. Little heed did they pay to him at 
 that time. Still were they wroth and bitter because of the in- 
 gratitude of the Gnomes, and the cruel slaying at the Haven 
 of the Swans. Moreover for a while all save Tulkas feared      
 the might and cunning of Morgoth. Now therefore they for-      

 

  tified all Valinor, and set a sleepless watch  upon the  wall of 
  hills, which they now  piled to  a sheer  and dreadful  height - 
  save  only  at  the  pass  of  Cor.'  There  were  the remaining 
  Elves  set  to  dwell,  and they  went now  seldom to  Valmar or 
  Tindbrenting's  height,  but  were  bidden  to  guard  the  pass 
  ceaselessly that no bird  nor beast  nor Elf  nor Man,  nor any- 
  thing  beside  that  came  from  the  lands without,  should ap- 
  proach the shores of  Faerie, or  set foot  in Valinor.  In that 
  day, which songs  call the  Hiding of  Valinor, the  Magic Isles 
  were  set,  filled  with  enchantment,  and  strung  across  the 
  confines  of  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before  the  Lonely  Isle  is 
  reached  sailing  West,  there  to  entrap  mariners   and  wind 
  them  in  everlasting  sleep. Thus  it was  that the  many emis- 
  saries  of  the  Gnomes  in  after  days  came  never   back  to 
  Valinor - save one, and he came too late.4                      
                                                                 
    The  Valar  sit  now  behind  the  mountains  and  feast,  and 
  dismiss  the  exiled  Noldoli  from   their  hearts,   all  save 
  Manwe  and  Ulmo.  Most  in  mind  did   Ulmo  keep   them,  who 
  gathers  news  of  the  outer  world through  all the  lakes and 
  rivers that flow into the sea.                                 
    At the  first rising  of the  Sun over  the world  the younger 
  children  of  earth awoke  in the  land of  Eruman (5) in  the East 
  of East.' But of Men little is told in these tales,  which con- 
  cern the oldest days  before the  waning of  the Elves  and the 
  waxing  of  mortals, save  of those  who in  the first  days of 
  Sunlight  and  Moonsheen  wandered  into   the  North   of  the 
 world.  To  Eruman  there  came  no  God  to  guide  Men  or to 
 summon  them  to  dwell  in  Valinor.  Ulmo  nonetheless took 
 thought  for  them,  and  his  messages came  often to  them by 
 stream  and  flood,  and  they  loved  the waters  but understood 
 little   the  messages.   The  Dark-elves   they  met   and  were 
 aided  by  them,  and  were  taught  by  them  speech   and  many 
 things beside, and became the friends of the children of the 
 Eldalie who had never found the paths to Valinor, and knew 
 of the Valar but as a rumour and a distant name. Not long 
 was then Morgoth come back into the earth, and his power 
 went not far abroad, so that there was little peril in the 

 


73 

 lands and hills where new things, fair and fresh,  long ages               
 ago devised in the thought of Yavanna, came at last to their               
 budding and their bloom.                                                   
   West,  North,  and  South  they  spread and  wandered, and               
 their joy was the joy of the morning before the dew  is dry,               
 when every leaf is green.                                                  
                                                                           
                                     *                                      
                                                                           
 1. Urien > Arien at all occurrences.                                      
 2. daughter of Vana struck out. See pp. 326 - '7.                         
 3. Cor > Kor, as previously.                                                
 4. and he came too late > the mightiest mariner of song.                    
 5. At the first occurrence the name Eruman was later underlined in pen-  
    cil, as if for correction, but not at the second.                        
 6. Added here:                                                              
                                                                           
       for measured time had come into the  world, and  the first  of days; 
       and thereafter the lives of the  Eldar that  remained in  the Hither 
       Lands were lessened, and their waning was begun.                     
                                                                           
                                      7.                                    
                                                                           
   Now began the times  of the  great wars  of the  powers of              
 the North, when the Gnomes of Valinor and Ilkorins and                      
 Men strove  against the  hosts of  Morgoth Bauglir,  and went              
 down in ruin. To this end  the cunning  lies of  Morgoth that              
 he sowed amongst his  foes, and  the curse  that came  of the              
 slaying at the Haven of the Swans, and the  oath of  the sons              
 of Feanor, were ever at work; the greatest injury they did to              
 Men and Elves.                                                             
   Only a part do these tales tell of the deeds of those days,              
 and most they tell  concerning the  Gnomes and  the Silmarils              
 and the mortals that became entangled in their fate. In the               
 early days Eldar and Men were of little different stature and              
 bodily might; but the Eldar were blessed with  greater skill,              
 beauty, and wit, and  those who  had come  from Valinor  as               
 much surpassed the Ilkorins in these things  as they  in turn              
 surpassed the people  of mortal  race. Only  in the  realm of              
 Doriath,  whose  queen  Melian  was  of  the  kindred  of the              

 

 Valar,  did  the  Ilkorins  come  near  to  match  the  Elves of           
 Cor.(1) Immortal  were   the  Elves,   and  their   wisdom  waxed           
 and  grew  from  age  to  age,  and  no  sickness  or pestilence           
 brought  them  death.  But  they  could  be  slain  with weapons           
 in  those  days,  even  by  mortal  Men,  and  some   waned  and           
 wasted  with sorrow  till they  faded from  the earth.  Slain or           
 fading their spirits went back to  the halls  of Mandos  to wait           
 a  thousand  years,  or  the  pleasure  of Mandos'  according to           
 their  deserts,   before  they   were  recalled   to  free   life  in 
 Valinor,  or  were  reborn,'  it  is  said,  into  their  own children.' 
 More   frail   were   Men,  more   easily  slain   by  weapon   or  mis- 
 chance,  subject  to   ills,  or   grew  old   and  died.   What  befell 
 their  spirits  the  Eldalie  knew  not.  The   Eldar  said   that  they 
 went  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,  but  that  their  place   of  waiting 
 was   not  that   of  the   Elves,  and   Mandos  under   Iluvatar  knew 
 alone  whither  they  went  after  the  time  in  his  wide   halls  be- 
 yond  the  western   sea.  They   were  never   reborn  on   earth,  and 
 none   ever   came   back   from   the  mansions   of  the   dead,  save 
 only  Beren  son   of  Barahir,   who  after   spoke  never   to  mortal 
 Men.  Maybe  their  fate   after  death   was  not   in  the   hands  of 
 the Valar.                                                               
     In after days, when because of the triumphs of Morgoth                 
   Elves  and  Men  became  estranged, as  he most  wished, those           
   of the Eldalie that lived still in the world faded, and Men 
   usurped the sunlight. Then  the Eldar  wandered in  the lone-         
   lier  places  of  the Outer'  Lands, and  took to  the moonlight         
   and to the starlight, and to the woods and caves.'                       
                                                                           


74 

                                     *                                      
                                                                           
   1. Cor > Kor, as previously.                                              
   2. Mandos > Nefantur                                                      
   3. or were reborn > or sometimes were reborn                                
   4. Added here:                                                            
                                                                           
       And of like fate were those fair offspring of Elf and mortal,        
       Earendel, and Elwing, and Dior her father, and Elrond her child. 
                                                                           
     Hither written above Outer, but Outer not struck out.                  
     Added at the end:                                                      

 

                                                              
                                                                      
  and became as shadows,  wraiths and  memories, such  as set  not sail 
  unto the West and vanished from the world, as is told ere  the tale's 
  ending.                                                              
                                                                      
                                   8.                                  
                                                                      
 But in these days Elves and Men were kindred and allies.              
 Before the rising of the Sun and Moon Feanor and his sons             
 marched into the North seeking for Morgoth. A host of                
 Orcs aroused by the light of the burning ships came down              
 on them, and there was battle on the plain renowned in                
 song. Yet young and green it stretched' to the feet of the          
 tall mountains upreared over Morgoth's halls; but afterward           
 it became burnt and desolate, and is called the Land of               
 Thirst, Dor-na-Fauglith in the Gnomish tongue. There was              
 the First Battle.' Great was the slaughter of the Orcs and            
 Balrogs, and no tale can tell the valour of Feanor or of his          
 sons. Yet woe entered into that first great victory. For              
 Feanor was wounded to the death by Gothmog Lord of                  
 Balrogs, whom Ecthelion after slew in Gondolin. Feanor                
 died in the hour of victory, looking upon the gigantic peaks        
 of Thangorodrim, the greatest of hills of the world;(3) and he        
 cursed the name of Morgoth, and laid it on his sons never             
 to treat or parley with their foe. Yet even in the hour of his        
 death there came to them an embassy from Morgoth ac-                 
 knowledging his defeat, and offering to treat, and tempting           
 them with a Silmaril. Maidros the tall persuaded the                  
 Gnomes to meet Morgoth at the time and place appointed,               
 but with as little thought of faith on his side as there was          
 on the part of Morgoth. Wherefore each embassy came in                
 far greater force than they had sworn, but Morgoth brought            
 the greater, and they were Balrogs. Maidros was ambushed              
 and most of his company was slain; but Maidros was taken              
 alive by the command of Morgoth, and carried to Angband               
 and tortured, and hung from the face of a sheer precipice             
 upon Thangorodrim by his right wrist alone.                           
 Then the six sons of Feanor dismayed drew off and en-                 
 camped by the shores of Lake Mithrim, in that northern                
 land which was after called Hisilome, Hithlum or Dorlomin             

 

 by  the  Gnomes,  which  is  the  Land  of  Mist.  There they 
 heard of  the march  of Fingolfin  and Finweg (4) and Felagund, 
 who had crossed the Grinding Ice.                             
   Even as these came the first Sun arose; their blue and sil- 
 ver banners were unfurled, and  flowers sprang  beneath their 
 marching  feet.  The  Orcs  dismayed at  the uprising  of the 
 great  light  retreated  to  Angband,  and  Morgoth  thwarted 
 pondered a long while in wrathful thought.                    
   Little  love  was  there  between  the  two  hosts encamped 
 upon the  opposing shores  of Mithrim,  and the  delay engen- 
 dered by their feud did great harm to the cause of both.      
   Now  vast  vapours   and  smokes   were  made   in  Angband 
 and  sent forth  from the  smoking tops  of the  Mountains of 
 Iron, which even afar off in Hithlum could be  seen staining 


75 

 the  radiance of  those earliest  mornings. The  vapours fell 
 and  coiled  about  the  fields  and  hollows,  and   lay  on 
 Mithrim's bosom dark and foul.                                
   Then Finweg the valiant  resolved to  heal the  feud. Alone 
 he went  in search  of Maidros.  Aided by  the very  mists of 
 Morgoth,  and  by the  withdrawal of  the forces  of Angband, 
 he ventured into the fastness of his enemies, and at  last he 
 found Maidros hanging in torment. But he could not reach 
 him to release him; and Maidros begged' him to shoot him 
 with his bow. 
   Manwe to whom all birds are dear, and to whom they 
 bring news upon Tindbrenting of all things which his far- 
 sighted eyes do not see, sent' forth the race of Eagles. 
 Thorndor was their king. At Manwe's command they dwelt 
 in the crags  of the  North and  watched Morgoth  and hin- 
 dered his  deeds, and  brought news  of him  to the  sad ears 
 of Manwe.                                                     
   Even  as  Finweg  sorrowing  bent   his  bow,   there  flew 
 down  from  the  high airs  Thorndor king  of eagles.  He was 
 the mightiest of all birds that ever  have been.  Thirty feet' 
 Was  the  span  of his  outstretched wings.  His beak  was of 
 gold. So the  hand of  Finweg was  stayed, and  Thorndor bore 
 to  the  face  of  the  rock  where  Maidros  hung.  But nei- 
 ther could  release the  enchanted bond  upon the  wrist, nor 

 

 sever it nor draw it from the stone.  Again in  agony Maidros                   
 begged  them  to  slay  him,  but  Finweg  cut  off  his hand                   
 above  the  wrist,  and  Thorndor bore  them to  Mithrim, and                   
 Maidros'  wound  was  healed,  and  he  lived to  wield sword                   
 with his left hand more deadly to his foes than his right had                   
 been.                                                                           
   Thus  was the  feud healed  for a  while between  the proud                   
 sons of Finn' and their jealousy  forgotten, but  still there                   
 held the oath of the Silmarils.                                                 
                                                                                
                                       *                                         
                                                                                
 1. Yet young and green > Yet dark beneath the stars (and later it stretched 
      > the plain stretched). (This change was made no doubt because the         
      Sun had not yet risen; but it destroys the force of the antithesis with 
      but afterward it became burnt and desolate.)                               
 2. Added here: the Battle under Stars.                                      
 3. the world > the hither world                                                  
 4. Finweg > Fingon, as previously, at all occurrences.                      
 5. The typescript had present tenses, finds, cannot, begs, early emended        
      to found, could not, begged; an indication that my father was closely 
      following the S manuscript. Present tenses are occasionally found later 
      in Q as originally typed.                                                  
 6.  sent > had sent                                                             
 7.  feet > fathoms                                                              
 8. Finn > Finwe, as previously.                                                  
                                                                                
                                          9.                                     
                                                                                
   Then   the   Gnomes   marched   forward    and   beleaguered                  
 Angband from West,  South, and  East. In  Hithlum and  on its                  
 borders in the West lay the hosts of Fingolfin. The South was                  
 held  by  Felagund  son of  Finrod and  his brethren.  A tower                  
 they had on an island in the river  Sirion, which  guarded the                  
 valley  between the  northward bending  mountains on  the bor-                  
 ders of  Hithlum and  the slopes  where the  great pine-forest                  
 grew,  which  Morgoth after  filled with  such dread  and evil                  
 that not even the Orcs would go through it,  save by  a single                  
 road  and  in great  need and  haste, and  the Gnomes  came to                  
 call  it  Taur-na-Fuin,  which is  Deadly Nightshade.  But in                  
 those days it was wholesome, if thick and dark,' and the peo-                  

 

  ple  of  Orodreth,  of  Angrod  and  Egnor, ranged  therein and 
  watched from its eaves the plain below,  that stretched  to the 


76 

  Mountains  of  Iron.  Thus  they guarded  the plain  of Sirion, 
  most fair of rivers in elfin song, most loved of Ulmo,  and all 
  that  wide  land  of  beech  and  elm  and  oak  and  flowering 
  mead that was named Broseliand.(2)                              
    In  the east  lay the  sons of  Feanor. Their  watchtower was 
  the  high hill  of Himling,  and their  hiding place  the Gorge 
  of  Aglon,  cloven  deep  between  Himling   and  Taur-na-Fuin, 
  and  watered by  the river  of Esgalduin  the dark  and strong, 
  which  came  out  of  secret wells  in Taur-na-Fuin  and flowed 
  into Doriath and past the  doors of  Thingol's halls.  But they 
  needed  little a  hiding place  in those  days, and  ranged far 
  and  wide,  even  to  the walls  of Angband  in the  North, and 
  east  to  the  Blue Mountains,'  which are  the borders  of the 
  lands  of which  these tales  tell. There  they made  war upon (4) 
  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod and  Belegost; but  they did  not dis- 
  cover  whence  that  strange  race  came,  nor have  any since. 
  They are not friend of Valar'  or of  Eldar or  of Men,  nor do 
  they  serve  Morgoth;  though  they  are  in  many  things more 
  like his people, and little  did they  love the  Gnomes.' Skill 
  they  had  well-nigh  to  rival  that of  the Gnomes,  but less 
  beauty  was  in  their  works,  and  iron  they  wrought rather 
  than gold and  silver, and  mail and  weapons were  their chief 
  craft. Trade and barter was  their delight  and the  winning of 
  wealth  of  which  they  made  little  use.  Long   were  their 
  beards  and  short  and  squat   their  stature.   Nauglir  the 
  Gnomes  called  them,  and  those  who  dwelt  in  Nogrod  they 
  called  Indrafangs,  the   Longbeards,  because   their  beards 
  swept the floor before their feet. But as yet little they trou- 
  bled  the  people  of  earth,  while  the  power of  the Gnomes 
  was great.                                                      
    This  was  the  time that  songs call  the Siege  of Angband. 
  The  swords  of  the  Gnomes  then  fenced  the earth  from the 
  ruin  of  Morgoth,  and  his  power was  shut behind  the walls 
  of   Angband.   The   Gnomes  boasted   that  never   could  he 
  break  their  leaguer,  and that  none of  his folk  could ever 
  pass to work evil in the ways of the world.                     

 

   A time of solace it was beneath the new Sun and Moon,        
 a time of birth and blossoming. In those days befell the first 
 meeting of the Gnomes with the Dark-elves, and the Feast       
 of Meeting that was held in the Land of Willows was long       
 recalled in after days of little joy. In those days too Men 
 came over the Blue Mountains into Broseliand (7) and              
 Hithlum,(8) the bravest and fairest of their race. Felagund it 
 was that found them, and he ever was their friend. On a        
 time he was the guest of Celegorm in the East, and rode        
 a-hunting with him. But he became separated from the oth- 
 ers,(9) and at a time of night he came upon a dale in the       
 western foothills of the Blue Mountains. There were lights 
 in the dale and the sound of rugged song. Then Felagund        
 marvelled, for the tongue of those songs was not the tongue  
 of Eldar or of Dwarves.(10) Nor was it the tongue of Orcs,       
 though this at first he feared. There were camped the peo-      
 ple of Beor, a mighty warrior of Men, whose son was           
 Barahir the bold. They were the first of Men to come into      
 Broseliand. After them came Hador the tall, whose sons         
 were Haleth and Gumlin, and the sons of Gumlin Huor and       
 Hurin,(11) and the son of Huor Tuor, and the son of Hurin         
 Turin. All these were tangled in the fates of the Gnomes       
 and did mighty deeds which the Elves still remember            
 among the songs of the deeds of their own lords and kings. 
   But Hador was not yet seen in the camps of the Gnomes.       
 That night Felagund went among the sleeping men of            
 Beor's host and sat by their dying fires where none kept       
 watch, and he took a harp which Beor had laid aside, and       
 he played music on it such as mortal ear had never heard,      
 having learned the strains of music from the Dark-elves        
 alone. Then men woke and listened and marvelled, for great 
 wisdom was in that song, as well as beauty, and the heart      


77 

 grew wiser that listened to it. Thus came it that Men called 
 Felagund, whom they met first of the Noldoli, Wisdom;(12)      
 and after him they called his race the Wise, whom we call      
 the Gnomes.(13)                                                
   Beor lived till death with Felagund, and Barahir his son 
 was the greatest friend of the sons of Finrod.(14) But the sons 

 

 of Hador were allied to the house of  Fingolfin, and  of these 
 Hurin  and  Turin  were  the  most  renowned.  The   realm  of 
 Gumlin  was  in  Hithlum,  and  there  afterward  Hurin  dwelt 
 and  his  wife  Morwen Elfsheen,  who was  fair as  a daughter 
 of the Eldalie.(15)                                            
                                                               
   Now  began  the  time  of  the  ruin of  the Gnomes.  It was 
 long  before  this  was  achieved, for  great was  their power 
 grown,  and  they  were  very valiant,  and their  allies were 
 many and bold, Dark-elves and Men.                             
   But  the  tide  of their  fortune took  a sudden  turn. Long 
 had  Morgoth  prepared  his  forces  in secret.  On a  time of 
 night at winter he let forth great rivers of flame that poured 
 over all the  plain before  the Mountains  of Iron  and burned 
 it  to  a  desolate  waste.  Many  of  the Gnomes  of Finrod's 
 sons perished in  that burning,  and the  fumes of  it wrought 
 darkness  and  confusion  among  the foes  of Morgoth.  In the 
 train  of  the  fire (16) came the  black armies  of the  Orcs in 
 numbers  such  as  the  Gnomes  had   never  before   seen  or 
 imagined.   In  this   way  Morgoth   broke  the   leaguer  of 
 Angband and  slew by  the hands  of the  Orcs a  great slaugh- 
 ter of the bravest of  the besieging  hosts. His  enemies were 
 scattered  far  and wide,  Gnomes, Ilkorins,  and Men.  Men he 
 drove for the  most part  back over  the Blue  Mountains, save 
 the  children  of  Beor  and  of  Hador  who  took  refuge  in 
 Hithlum  beyond  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  where  as  yet  the 
 Orcs  came  not  in  force.  The  Dark-elves  fled   south  to 
 Broseliand (17) and  beyond, but  many went  to Doriath,  and the 
 kingdom and power  of Thingol  grew great  in that  time, till 
 he became  a bulwark  and a  refuge of  the Elves.  The magics 
 of  Melian  that  were  woven  about  the  borders  of Doriath 
 fenced evil from his halls and realm.                          
   The pine-forest Morgoth  took and  turned it  to a  place of 
 dread  as  has  been  told,  and the  watchtower of  Sirion he 
 took  and  made  it  into  a  stronghold  of evil  and menace. 
 There dwelt Thu the chief  servant of  Morgoth, a  sorcerer of 
 dreadful power,  the lord  of wolves.(18) Heaviest had  the bur- 
 den of that dreadful battle, the second  battle and  the first 

 

 defeat (19) of the Gnomes, fallen upon the sons of Finrod.          
 There were Angrod and Egnor slain. There too would              
 Felagund have been taken or slain, but Barahir came up          
 with all his men and saved the Gnomish king and made a          
 wall of spears about him; and though grievous was their         
 loss they fought their way from the Orcs and fled to the        
 fens of Sirion to the South. There Felagund swore an oath       
 of undying friendship and aid in time of need to Barahir        
 and all his kin and seed, and in token of his vow he gave       
 to Barahir his ring.                                            
   Then Felagund went South, (20) and on the banks of Narog         
 established after the manner of Thingol a hidden and cav-       
 ernous city, and a realm. Those deep places were called         
 Nargothrond. There came Orodreth after a time of breath-        
 less flight and perilous wanderings, and with him Celegorm      
 and Curufin, the sons of Feanor, his friends. The people of 
 Celegorm swelled the strength of Felagund, but it would        
 have been better if they had gone rather to their own kin,      
 who fortified the hill of Himling (21) east of Doriath and filled 
 the Gorge of Aglon with hidden arms.                            
   Most grievous of the losses of that battle was the death  
 of Fingolfin mightiest of the Noldoli. But his own death he 
 sought in rage and anguish seeing the defeat of his people. 


78 

 For he went to the gates of Angband alone and smote upon        
 them with his sword, and challenged Morgoth to come out         
 and fight alone. And Morgoth came. That was the last time      
 in those wars that he left the gates of his strong places, but 
 he could not deny the challenge before the faces of his         
 lords and chieftains. Yet it is said that though his power and 
 strength is the greatest of the Valar and of all things here 
 below, at heart he is a craven when alone, and that he took 
 not the challenge willingly. The Orcs sing of that duel at 
 the gates, but the Elves do not, though Thorndor looked        
 down upon it and has told the tale.                             
   High Morgoth towered above the head of Fingolfin, but         
 great was the heart of the Gnome, bitter his despair and ter- 
 rible his wrath. Long they fought. Thrice was Fingolfin        
 beaten to his knees and thrice arose. Ringil was his sword, 

 

  as cold its blade and as bright as  the blue  ice, and  on his 
  shield was the star on a blue field that  was his  device. But 
  Morgoth's  shield  was   black  without   a  blazon   and  its 
  shadow  was  like  a  thundercloud.  He  fought  with  a  mace 
  like a great hammer of his forges. Grond  the Orcs  called it, 
  and when it smote the earth as Fingolfin slipped aside,  a pit 
  yawned  and  smoke  came  forth.  Thus  was   Fingolfin  over- 
  come,  for  the  earth  was  broken  about  his  feet,  and he 
  tripped and fell, and Morgoth put his foot,  that is  heavy as 
  the roots of hills, upon his neck. But this  was not  done be- 
  fore  Ringil  had  given  him  seven  wounds,  and at  each he 
  had cried aloud. He goes halt in his left foot for ever, where 
  in his last despair  Fingolfin pierced  it through  and pinned 
  it to the earth.(22) But the scar upon his face Fingolfin did not 
  give.  This was  the work  of Thorndor.  For Morgoth  took the 
  body of Fingolfin to hew  it and  give it  to his  wolves. But 
  Thorndor  swept  down  from  on  high  amid  the  very throngs 
  of  Angband  that  watched  the  fight,  and  smote  his claw" 
 into the face of Morgoth and rescued the body of Fingolfin, 
 and bore it to a great height. There he set his cairn upon a 
 mountain, and that mountain looks down upon the plain of 
 Gondolin, and over the Mount of Fingolfin no Orc or de- 
 mon ever dared to pass for a great while, till  treachery was 
 born among his kin.                                             
   But  Finweg (24) took the  kingship of  the Gnomes,  and held 
 yet  out,  nighest  of  the  scattered Gnomes  to the  realm of 
 their  foe,  in  Hithlum  and  the  Shadowy  Mountains  of  the 
 North that  lie South  and East  of the  Land of  Mist, between 
 it  and Broseliand  and the  Thirsty Plain.  Yet each  of their 
 strongholds  Morgoth  took  one  by  one,  and  ever  the  Orcs 
 growing more bold wandered far and wide, and numbers of 
 the Gnomes and Dark-elves they took captive and carried to 
 Angband and made thralls, and forced them to use their      
 skill and magic in the service of Morgoth, and to labour 
 unceasingly in tears in his mines and forges.(25) And Mor- 
 goth's emissaries went ever among the Dark-elves and the 
 thrall-Gnomes and Men (to whom in those days he feigned 
 the greatest friendship while they were out of his power), 

 

 and lying promises they made and false suggestions                         
 the greed and treachery of each to each; and because of the               
 curse of the slaying at Swanhaven often were the lies be-                  
 lieved; and the Gnomes feared greatly the treachery                        
 those of their own kin who had been thralls of Angband,                    
 that even if they escaped and came back to their people lit-               
 tle welcome they had, and wandered often in miserable ex-                  
 ile and despair (26)                                                       
                                                                           
  1. Added here: and it was called Taur Danin (late change).                 
  2. Broseliand > Beleriand (see note 7), and the following added:           
                                                                           
       in Gnomish tongue; and Noldorien has it been  called, [Geleithian>]  
       Geleidhian,  the  kingdom  of  the  Gnomes,  and  Ingolonde the fair 


79 

       and sorrowful.                                                       
                                                                           
  3. east to the Blue Mountains > east unto Erydluin, the Blue Mountains.    
    Against Erydluin was pencilled later Eredlindon.                        
  4. made war upon > had converse with (late change).                        
  5. This sentence was emended to read: Little friendship was there be-         
    tween Elf and Dwarf, for these are not friend of Valar, &c. (late           
    change).                                                                
  6. and little did they love the Gnomes bracketed for exclusion (late           
    change).                                                                
  7. Broseliand > Beleriand at all occurrences (see note 2).                 
  8. and Hithlum struck out.                                                 
  9. Added here: and passed into Ossiriand (late change).                    
 10. Almost illegible words were pencilled above Eldar or of Dwarves.        
   the (? Valar] or of [?Doriath ] nor yet of the Green Elves.              
 11. This sentence was emended to read: After them came Hador the            
    Golden-haired, whose sons were Gundor and Gumlin, and the sons of       
    Gumlin Hurin and Huor, &c. (late change). At the bottom of the          
    page, without direction for its insertion, is written: Haleth the hunter, 
    and little later                                                        
 12. Wisdom > Gnome that is Wisdom > Gnome or Wisdom                         
 13. Added here: Took F[elagund] to be a god (late change).                  
 14. Added here: but he abode in Dorthonion (late change).                    
 15. Written here, with mark of insertion: Dagor Aglareb and the Fore-       
    boding of the Kings (late addition).                                    
 16. In the train of the fire > In the pont of that fire came Glomund the    
    golden, the father of dragons, and in his train                         

 

                                                      
                                                                               
   17. Above Beleriand (emended from Broseliand, see note 7)  is pencilled 
         Geleidhian (see note 2).                                               
   18. Scribbled  against  this:  Sauron his  servant in  Valinor whom  he sub- 
         orned.                                                                 
   19. the second battle and the first defeat  > the  Second Battle,  the Battle 
         of Sudden Flame, and the first defeat (and later Second > Third). 
   20. Added here: and West                                                
   21. Himling > Himring (late change; at the first two occurrences of the 
         name, near the beginning of this section, it was not emended).         
   22. and pinned it to the earth struck through (late change).                  
   23. claw > bill                                                               
   24. Finweg > Fingon, as previously.                                           
   25. In this sentence magic > craft and in tears  in his  mines and  forges to 
         an  uncertain  reading,  probably  and  tears  and torment  were their 
         wages (late changes).                                                  
   26. A page of the typescript  ends here,  and at  the bottom  of the  page is 
         written Turgon (late addition).                                        
                                                                               
                                        10.                                     
                                                                               
       In these days of doubt and fear, after the Second (1) Battle,               
   many dreadful things befell of  which but  few are  here told.               
   It is  told that  Beor was  slain and  Barahir yielded  not to               
   Morgoth, but  all his  land was  won from  him and  his people               
   scattered,  enslaved  or slain,  and he  himself went  in out-               
   lawry  with  his  son Beren  and ten  faithful men.  Long they               
   hid  and  did  secret  and  valiant deeds  of war  against the               
   Orcs. But in the end, as is told in the  beginning of  the lay               
   of  Luthien and  Beren, the  hiding place  of Barahir  was be-               
   trayed,  and he  was slain  and his  comrades, all  save Beren               
   who by  fortune was  that day  hunting afar.  Thereafter Beren               
   lived an outlaw alone,  save for  the help  he had  from birds               
   and beasts which he loved;  and seeking  for death  in desper-               
   ate deeds found it  not, but  glory and  renown in  the secret               
   songs  of  fugitives and  hidden enemies  of Morgoth,  so that               
   the tale of his  deeds came  even to  Broseliand,(2) and  was ru-               
   moured  in  Doriath.  At  length  Beren  fled  south  from the               
   ever-closing circle of those that hunted him, and  crossed the               
   dreadful  Mountains  of Shadow,(3) and came  at last  worn and               


80 

   haggard  into  Doriath.  There in  secret he  won the  love of               
   Luthien  daughter  of  Thingol,  and  he  named  her Tinuviel,               

 

  the nightingale, because of the  beauty of  her singing  in the 
  twilight beneath the  trees; for  she was  the daughter  of Me- 
  lian.                                                           
    But  Thingol was  wroth and  he dismissed  him in  scorn, but 
  did not slay him because  he had  sworn an  oath to  his daugh- 
  ter. But he desired nonetheless to send him to his  death. And 
  he thought in his heart of a quest that could not  be achieved, 
  and he said: If thou bring me a Silmaril from the crown of      
  Morgoth, I will let Luthien wed thee, if  she will.  And Beren, 
  vowed  to  achieve  this,  and  went from  Doriath to  Nargo- 
  thrond bearing the ring of Barahir. The  quest of  the Silmaril 
  there aroused the oath from sleep that the  sons of  Feanor had 
  sworn,  and evil  began to  grow from  it. Felagund,  though he 
  knew the  quest to  be beyond  his power,  was willing  to lend 
  all his aid to Beren, because of his own oath to Barahir. But 
  Celegorm  and  Curufin  dissuaded his  people and  roused up 
  rebellion  against  him.  And  evil  thoughts  awoke  in their 
  hearts, and they thought to usurp  the throne  of Nargothrond, 
  because they were sons of the eldest line. Rather than a Sil- 
  maril  should be  won and  given to  Thingol, they  would ruin 
  the power of Doriath and Nargothrond.                           
    So  Felagund  gave  his  crown   to  Orodreth   and  departed 
  from his people with  Beren and  ten faithful  men of  his own- 
  board.  They  waylaid  an  Orc-band  and  slew  them  and  dis- 
  guised  themselves  by the  aid of  Felagund's magic  as Orcs.- 
  But  they  were  seen  by  Thu  from  his   watchtower,  which' 
  once  had  been  Felagund's  own,   and  were   questioned  by 
  him,  and  their  magic  was  overthrown  in a  contest between 
  Thu  and  Felagund.  Thus  they  were  revealed  as  Elves, but 
  the  spells  of  Felagund  concealed  their  names  and  quest. 
  Long  they  were  tortured  in  the dungeons  of Thu,  but none 
  betrayed the other.                                             
    In  the  meanwhile  Luthien  learning  by  the  far  sight of 
  Melian that Beren  had fallen  into the  power of  Thu sought 
  in  her  despair  to  fly  from Doriath.  This became  known to 
  Thingol, who imprisoned her in a  house in  the tallest  of his 
  mighty  beeches  far  above  the  ground.  How she  escaped and 
  came into the woods, and was found there by Celegorm as         

 

 they hunted on the borders of Doriath, is told  in the  lay of 
 Luthien.  They  took  her  treacherously  to  Nargothrond, and 
 Curufin  the  crafty  became  enamoured  of  her  beauty. From 
 her  tale  they  learned  that  Felagund was  in the  hands of 
 Thu;  and  they  purposed to  let him  perish there,  and keep 
 Luthien  with  them,  and  force  Thingol  to  wed  Luthien to 
 Curufin,4  and  so  build  up  their  power  and  usurp Nargo- 
 thrond  and  become  the  mightiest  of  the  princes  of  the 
 Gnomes.  They  did  not  think  to  go in  search of  the Sil- 
 marils, or suffer any others to do so, until they had  all the 
 power  of  the  Elves  beneath  themselves  and   obedient  to 
 them.  But  their  designs  came  to nought  save estrangement 
 and bitterness between the kingdoms of the Elves.             
   Huan  was  the  name  of   the  chief   of  the   hounds  of 
 Celegorm.  He  was  of  immortal  race from  the hunting-lands 
 of  Orome.  Orome  gave  him  to   Celegorm  long   before  in 
 Valinor,  when Celegorm  often rode  in the  train of  the God 
 and  followed his  horn. He  came into  the Great'  Lands with 
 his  master,  and  dart  nor weapon,  spell nor  poison, could 
 harm  him,  so  that  he went  into battle  with his  lord and 
 saved  him  many  times  from  death.  His  fate had  been de- 
 creed that he should not meet death save at  the hands  of the 
 mightiest wolf that should ever walk the world.               
   Huan  was  true  of  heart,  and he  loved Luthien  from the 
 hour that  he first  found her  in the  woods and  brought her 
 to Celegorm.  His heart  was grieved  by his  master's treach- 
 ery, and he set Luthien free and went with her to the North. 


81 

   There  Thu  slew  his  captives  one   by  one,   till  only 
 Felagund  and  Beren  were  left.  When  the hour  for Beren's 
 death came Felagund  put forth  all his  power, and  burst his 
 bonds,  and  wrestled  with  the  werewolf  that came  to slay 
 Beren; and he killed the wolf,  but was  himself slain  in the 
 dark.  There  Beren  mourned  in   despair,  and   waited  for 
 death.  But  Luthien  came  and  sang  outside  the  dungeons. 
 Thus  she  beguiled Thu  to come  forth, for  the fame  of the 
 loveliness  of  Luthien  had  gone through  all lands  and the 
 wonder  of  her  song.  Even  Morgoth  desired  her,  and  had 
 promised the  greatest reward  to any  who could  capture her. 

 

 Each wolf  that Thu  sent Huan  slew silently,  till Draugluin 
 the  greatest  of  his  wolves  came.  Then  there  was fierce 
 battle, and Thu knew that Luthien  was not  alone. But  he re- 
 membered  the fate  of Huan,  and he  made himself  the great- 
 est wolf that had yet walked the world, and came forth. But  
 Huan  overthrew  him,  and  won  from  him  the  keys  and the 
 spells that held together his enchanted  walls and  towers. So 
 the stronghold was  broken and  the towers  thrown down  and 
 the dungeons opened. Many captives were released, but         
 Thu  flew  in  bat's  form  to  Taur-na-Fuin.   There  Luthien 
 found  Beren  mourning  beside Felagund.  She healed  his sor- 
 row  and  the  wasting  of  his  imprisonment,   but  Felagund 
 they buried on the top of his own island hill, and Thu  came 
 there no more.                                                
   Then  Huan returned  to his  master, and  less was  the love 
 between  them  after.  Beren  and  Luthien  wandered  careless 
 in happiness, until they came nigh to  the borders  of Doriath 
 once more. There Beren remembered his vow, and bade          
 Luthien farewell, but she would not be sundered from him. 
 In  Nargothrond  there  was  tumult.  For  Huan  and  many  of 
 the  captives of  Thu brought  back the  tidings of  the deeds 
 of Luthien, and the death of Felagund, and the treachery of 
 Celegorm and Curufin was laid bare. It is  said they  had sent 
 a secret embassy to Thingol ere Luthien escaped, but          
 Thingol in wrath had sent their letters back  by his  own ser- 
 vants to Orodreth.' Wherefore  now the  hearts of  the people: 
 of  Narog  tumed  back  to  the  house  of  Finrod,  and  they 
 mourned  their  king  Felagund  whom  they  had  forsaken, and 
 they did the bidding of Orodreth.  But he  would not  suffer  
 them to slay the  sons of  Feanor as  they wished.  Instead he 
 banished  them from  Nargothrond, and  swore that  little love 
 should there be between Narog and any of the sons of          
 Feanor thereafter. And so it was.                             
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  were  riding  in  haste and  wrath  
 through the woods to find their way to  Himling,(7) when they 
 came  upon Beren  and Luthien,  even as  Beren sought  to part 
 from  his  love.  They  rode  down  on  them,  and recognizing 
 them  tried  to   trample  Beren   under  their   hooves.  But 

 

 Curufin swerving lifted Luthien to  his saddle.  Then befell 
 the leap  of Beren,  the greatest  leap of  mortal Men.  For he 
 sprang like a lion right  upon the  speeding horse  of Curufin, 
 and grasped him  about the  throat, and  horse and  rider fell 
 in confusion upon  the earth,  but Luthien  was flung  far off 
 and   lay   dazed   upon  the   ground.  There   Beren  choked 
 Curufin,  but  his  death  was  very  nigh from  Celegorm, who 
 rode back with his spear. In that hour Huan forsook the ser- 
 vice  of  Celegorm,  and  sprang  upon him  so that  his horse 
 swerved aside, and no man for fear of the terror of  the great 
 hound dared  go nigh.  Luthien forbade  the death  of Curufin, 
 but Beren despoiled  him of  his horse  and weapons,  chief of 
 which  was  his  famous  knife,  made   by  the   Dwarves.  It 
 would  cut iron  like wood.  Then the  brothers rode  off, but 
 shot  back  at Huan  treacherously and  at Luthien.  Huan they 
 did  not  hurt,  but  Beren sprang  before Luthien  and was 
 wounded,   and   Men   remembered   that  wound   against  the 
 sons of Feanor, when it became known.                          


82 

    Huan stayed with Luthien, and  hearing of  their perplexity 
 and the  purpose Beren  had still  to go  to Angband,  he went 
 and fetched them  from the  ruined halls  of Thu  a werewolf's 
 coat and a bat's. Three times only did  Huan speak  with the 
 tongue  of  Elves or  Men. The  first was  when he  came to 
 Luthien  in  Nargothrond.  This  was the  second, when  he de- 
 vised  the  desperate counsel  for their  quest. So  they rode 
 North, till they could no longer go on  horse in  safety. Then 
 they  put  on  the  garments as  of wolf  and bat,  and Luthien 
 in guise of evil fay rode upon the werewolf.                   
    In  the  lay  of  Luthien  is  all  told  how they  came to 
 Angband's  gate,  and found  it newly  guarded, for  rumour of 
 he  knew  not  what  design  abroad among  the Elves  had come 
 to  Morgoth.  Wherefore  he  fashioned  the  mightiest  of all 
 Wolves,  Carcharas (8) Knife-fang,  to  sit  at the  gates.' But 
 Luthien  set  him in  spells, and  they won  their way  to the 
 presence  of  Morgoth,  and  Beren  slunk  beneath  his chair. 
  Then Luthien dared the most dreadful and most valiant 
  deed that any of the women of the Elves have ever dared; 
  no less than the challenge of Fingolfin is it accounted, and 

 

 may be greater, save that she was half-divine. She cast off 
 her disguise and named her own name, and feigned that she      
 was brought captive by the wolves of Thu. And she be-          
 guiled Morgoth, even as his heart plotted foul evil within 
 him; and she danced before him, and cast all his court in      
 sleep; and she sang to him, and she flung the magic robe       
 she had woven in Doriath in his face, and she set a binding 
 dream upon him - what song can sing the marvel of that         
 deed, or the wrath and humiliation of Morgoth, for even the 
 Orcs laugh in secret when they remember it, telling how       
 Morgoth fell from his chair and his iron crown rolled upon 
 the floor.                                                     
   Then forth leaped Beren casting aside the wolvish robe,      
 and drew out the knife of Curufin. With that he cut forth a 
 Silmaril. But daring more he essayed to gain them all. Then: 
 the knife of the treacherous Dwarves snapped, and the ring- 
 ing sound of it stirred the sleeping hosts and Morgoth         
 groaned. Terror seized the hearts of Beren and Luthien, and 
 they fled down the dark ways of Angband. The doors were        
 barred by Carcharas, now aroused from the spell of             
 Luthien. Beren set himself before Luthien, which proved ill; 
 for ere she could touch the wolf with her robe or speak        
 word of magic, he sprang upon Beren, who now had no          
 weapon. With his right he smote at the eyes of Carcharas, 
 but the wolf took the hand into his jaws and bit it off. Now 
 that hand held the Silmaril. Then was the maw of Carcharas 
 burned with a fire of anguish and torment, when the            
 Silmaril touched his evil flesh; and he fled howling from 
 before them, so that all the mountains shuddered, and the      
 madness of the wolf of Angband was of all the horrors that 
 ever came into the North o the most dire and terrible.         
 Hardly did Luthien and Beren escape, ere all Angband was       
 aroused.                                                       
   Of their wanderings and despair, and of the healing of       
 Beren, who ever since has been called Beren Ermabwed the       
 One-handed, of their rescue by Huan, who had vanished,         
 suddenly from them ere they came to Angband, and of their      
 coming to Doriath once more, here there is little to tell.(11) 

 

 But in Doriath  many things  had befallen.  Ever things had 
 gone ill there since Luthien fled away.  Grief had  fallen on 
 all the people and silence on their songs when  their hunting 
 found  her  not.  Long  was  the  search,  and  in  searching 
 Dairon  the  piper  of  Doriath was  lost, who  loved Luthien 
 before  Beren came  to Doriath.  He was  the greatest  of the 
 musicians  of  the  Elves,  save  Maglor  son of  Feanor, and 
 Tinfang  Warble.  But  he  came  never  back  to  Doriath and 
 strayed into the East of the world.>                          


83 

    Assaults too there were on Doriath's borders,  for rumours 
 that  Luthien  was  astray had  reached Angband.  Boldog cap- 
 tain of the Orcs was there  slain in  battle by  Thingol, and 
 his   great   warriors   Beleg   the   Bowman   and   Mablung 
 Heavyhand  were  with  Thingol in  that battle.  Thus Thingol 
 learned that Luthien  was yet  free of  Morgoth, but  that he 
 knew of her wandering; and Thingol was  filled with  fear. In 
                                                              
                                                              
 the midst of his fear came the embassy of Celegorm in se- 
 cret,  and  said  that  Beren  was  dead,  and  Felagund, and 
 Luthien  was  at Nargothrond.  Then Thingol  found it  in his 
 heart  to  regret  the  death  of  Beren,  and his  wrath was 
 aroused at the hinted treachery of Celegorm  to the  house of 
 Finrod,  and because  he kept  Luthien and  did not  send her 
 home. Wherefore he sent  spies into  the land  of Nargothrond 
 and prepared for war. But  he learned  that Luthien  had fled 
 and  that Celegorm  and his  brother were  gone to  Aglon. So 
 now he  sent an  embassy to  Aglon, since  his might  was not 
 great enough to fall upon all the seven brethren, nor was his 
 quarrel  with  others  than  Celegorm  and Curufin.  But this 
 embassy journeying  in the  woods met  with the  onslaught of 
 Carcharas. That great wolf had run in madness through all 
 the  woods  of  the  North,  and  death and  devastation went 
 with  him.  Mablung  alone escaped  to bear  the news  of his 
 coming  to Thingol.  Of fate,  or the  magic of  the Silmaril 
 that he bore to his torment, he was not stayed by  the spells 
 of Melian,  but burst  into the  inviolate woods  of Doriath, 
 and far and wide terror and destruction was spread.           
    Even as the sorrows of  Doriath were  at their  worst came 
 Luthien  and  Beren  and  Huan  back  to  Doriath.  Then  the 

 

 heart of Thingol was lightened, but he looked not with love 
 upon Beren in whom he saw the cause of all his woes.         
 When he had learned how Beren had escaped from Thu he        
 was amazed, but he said: 'Mortal, what of thy quest and of 
 thy vow?' Then said Beren: 'Even now I have a Silmaril in 
 my hand.' 'Show it to me,' said Thingol. 'That I cannot,' 
 said Beren, 'for my hand is not here.' And all the tale he 
 told, and made clear the cause of the madness of Carcharas, 
 and Thingol's h art was softened by his brave words, and 
 his forbearance, and the great love that he saw between his 
 daughter and this most valiant Man.                          
   Now therefore did they plan the wolf-hunt of Carcharas. 
 In that hunt was Huan and Thingol and Mablung and Beleg      
 and Beren and no more. And here the sad tale of it must be 
 short, for it is elsewhere told more fully. Luthien remained 
 behind in foreboding, as they went forth; and well she       
 might, for Carcharas was slain, but Huan died in the same 
 hour, and he died to save Beren.'4 Yet Beren was hurt to the 
 death, but lived to place the Silmaril in the hands of       
 Thingol, when Mablung had cut it from the belly of the  
 wolf. Then he spoke not again, until they had borne him      
 with Huan at his side back to the doors of Thingol's halls. 
 There beneath the beech, wherein before she had been im- 
 prisoned, Luthien met them, and kissed Beren ere his spirit 
 departed to the halls of awaiting. So ended the long tale of 
 Luthien and Beren. But not yet was the lay of Leithian, re- 
 lease from bondage, told in full. For it has long been said 
 that Luthien failed and faded swiftly and vanished from the 
 earth, though some songs say that Melian summoned            
 Thorndor, and he bore her living unto Valinor. And she       
 came to the halls of Mandos, and she sang to him a tale of 
 moving love so fair that he was moved to pity, as never has 
 befallen since. Beren he summoned, and thus, as Luthien      
 had sworn as she kissed him at the hour of death, they met 
 beyond the western sea. And Mandos suffered them to de-      
 part, but he said that Luthien should become mortal even as 
 her lover, and should leave the earth once more in the man- 


84 

 ner of mortal women, and her beauty become but a mem-       

 

 ory of song. So it was, but it is said that  in recompense            
 Mandos  gave  to Beren  and to  Luthien thereafter  a long            
 span of life and joy, and they wandered knowing thirst nor            
 cold in the  fair land  of Broseliand,  and no  mortal Man            
 thereafter spoke to Beren or his spouse.> Yet he came back            
 into these tales when one more sad than his was done.                 
                                                                      
                                   *                                   
                                                                      
  1. Second > Third (late change); see $9 note 19.                      
  2. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                             
  3. Mountains of Shadow > Mountains of Terror (see III. 170 - 1).      
  4. Curufin struck through and Cele[gorm] written above (late change). 
  5. Great > Hither (cf. $3 note 8).                                    
  6. This sentence, from Thingol in wrath, emended to: Thingol was      
    wroth, and would have gone to war with them as is later told.       
  7. Himling > Himring, as in $9 note 21 (late change).                 
  8. Carcharas > Carcharoth at all occurrences.                         
  9. Added here: Dire and dreadful was that beast; and songs have also 
    named him Borosaith, Everhungry, and Anfauglin, Jaws of Thirst. 
 10. Added here: ere Angband's fall                                     
 11. Late addition in the margin: Thorndor bore them over Gondolin to 
    Brethil.                                                           
 12. save Maglor son of Feanor, and Tinfang Warble > and Maglor son 
    of Feanor and Tinfang Gelion alone are named with him.             
 13. Added here: where long he made secret music in memory of Luthien. 
 14. Added here: and he bade him farewell, and that was the third and 
    last time Huan spoke.                                              
 15. This sentence emended to: and they wandered knowing neither thirst 
    nor cold upon the confies of Geleidhian in fair Ossiriand, Land of 
    Seven Streams, Gwerth-i-cuina, the Living Dead; and no monal Man 
    thereafter, &c.                                                    
                                                                      
                                  11.                                   
                                                                      
   Now'  it must  be told  that Maidros  son of  Feanor per-           
 ceived that Morgoth was not unassailable after the deeds of           
 Huan and Luthien and the breaking of the towers of Thu,(2)          
 but that he would destroy them all one by one, if  they did            
 not form again a league and council. This was the Union of            
 Maidros  and  wisely planned.  The scattered  Ilkorins and            
 Men were gathered  together, while  the forces  of Maidros            
 made ever fiercer assaults from  Himling,' and  drove back            

 

                      
                                                                 
 the Orcs and took their spies. The smithies of Nogrod and        
 Belegost  were  busy  in  those  days  making  mail   and  sword 
 and  spear  for  many  armies,  and  much   of  the   wealth  and 
 jewelry of Elves and Men they got  into their  keeping in  that  
 time,  though  they  went  not  themselves  to  war.  'For  we do 
 not know  the rights  of this  quarrel,' they  said, 'and  we are 
 friends  of  neither  side  -  until it  hath the  mastery.' Thus 
 great  and  splendid  was  the  army  of  Maidros, but  the oath 
 and the curse did injury to his design.                          
    All  the  hosts  of  Hithlum,  Gnomes  and  Men,   were  ready 
 to his summons, and Finweg (4) and Turgon and Huor and              
 Hurin were their chiefs.' Orodreth would not march from        
 Narog at the word of Maidros, because of the death of           
 Felagund,  and  the  deeds  of  Curufin  and  Celegorm.(6) Yet  he 
 suffered  a  small  company  of  the   bravest,  who   would  not 
 endure to be idle when the great war was afoot, to go           
 North.  Their  leader  was  the  young  Flinding  son  of Fuilin, 
 most  daring of  the scouts  of Nargothrond;  but they  took the 
 devices  of  the  house  of  Finweg  and  went  beneath  his ban 
 ners, and came never back, save one.'                            
    From  Doriath  none  came.'  For  Maidros  and  his  brethren 


85 

 had  before  sent   unto  Doriath   and  reminded   Thingol  with 
 exceedingly   haughty   words  of   their  oath,   and  summoned 
 him  to  yield  up the  Silmaril. This  Melian counselled  him to 
 do,  and  maybe  he  would  have  done,  but  their   words  were 
 overproud,  and  he  thought  how  the  jewel  had  been gained 
 by  the  sorrows   of  Thingol's   people,'  and   despite  the 
 crooked  deeds  of  the  sons  of  Feanor;  and  greed"  too,  it 
 may  be,  had  some  part in  the heart  of Thingol,  as after- 
 wards  was  shown.   Wherefore  he   sent  the   messengers  of 
 Maidros  back  in  scorn.  Maidros  said  nought,  for   at  that 
 time  he  was  beginning  to  ponder  the  reunion of  the forces 
 of  the  Elves.  But   Celegorm  and   Curufin  vowed   aloud  to 
 slay  Thingol  or  any  of  his  folk they  should ever  see, by 
 night or day, in war or peace.                                   
    For  this  reason  Thingol  went  not forth,(13) nor any  out of 
 Doriath save Mablung, and Beleg who obeyed no man.               
    Now  came   the  day   when  Maidros   sent  forth   his  sum- 

 

 mons  and  the  Dark-elves,  save out  of Doriath,  marched to 
 his  banner,  and  Men  from  East and  South. But  Finweg and 
 Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum were  gathered in  the West 
 upon the borders of the Thirsty Plain, waiting for  the signal 
 of  the  advancing  standards from  the East.  It may  be that 
 Maidros delayed too long gathering his  forces; certain  it is 
 that  secret  emissaries  of  Morgoth  went  among  the camps, 
 thrall-Gnomes  or things  in elfin  form, and  spread forebod- 
 ing  and  thoughts  of disunion.  To Men  they went  most, and 
 the fruit of their words was later seen.                      
   Long  the army  waited in  the West,  and fear  of treachery 
 fell  upon them,  when Maidros  came not,  and the  hot hearts 
 of  Finweg  and  Turgon  became  impatient.'4 They  sent their 
 heralds across the plain and their  silver trumpets  rang; and 
 they  summoned  the  hosts  of  Morgoth  to  come   out.  Then 
 Morgoth sent forth a force, great and yet  not too  great. And 
 Finweg  was  moved to  attack from  the woods  at the  feet of 
 the  Shadowy  Mountains  where  he  lay  hid. But  Hurin spoke 
 against it.                                                   
   Then Morgoth led  forth one  of the  heralds of  Finweg that 
 he  had  wrongfully  taken  prisoner  and  slew  him  upon the 
 plain, so that the watchers from afar might see - for  far and 
 clear do the eyes of the Gnomes behold  things in  bright air. 
 Then  the  wrath  of  Finweg  burst  its  bonds  and  his army 
 leaped forth to sudden  onslaught. This  was as  Morgoth de- 
 signed, but it is said that  he reckoned  not the  true number 
 of their array, nor knew yet the measure of their  valour, and 
 well  nigh  his  plan  went ill.  Ere his  army could  be suc- 
 coured  they  were  overwhelmed,  and  that  day  there  was a 
 greater slaughter of the  servants of  Morgoth than  there yet 
 had been, and  the banners  of Finweg  were raised  before the 
 walls of Angband.                                             
    Flinding,  it  is said,  and the  men of  Nargothrond burst 
 even  within  the  gates;  and  fear  came  on Morgoth  on his 
 throne. But  they were  slain or  taken, for  no help  came." By 
 other secret gates Morgoth let issue forth the main  host that 
 he  had  kept  in  waiting,   and  Finweg   and  the   Men  of 
 Hithlum were beaten back from the walls.                      

 

   Then in the plain began the Battle of Unnumbered             
 Tears,' of which no song or tale tells the full, for the voice 
 of the teller is whelmed in lamentation. The host of the       
 Elves was surrounded. Yet in that hour there marched up at 
 last the banners of Maidros and his allies from the East.      
 Even yet the Elves might have won the day, for the Orcs        
 wavered. But as the vanguard of Maidros came upon the          
 Orcs, Morgoth let loose his last forces, and all Angband       
 was empty. There came wolves and serpents, and there           
 came Balrogs like fire, and there came the first of all the 
 dragons, the eldest of all the Worms of Greed. Glomund         
 was his name and long had his terror been noised abroad,       


86 

 though he was not come to his full growth and evil, and        
 seldom had he been seen.(17) Thus Morgoth strove to hinder        
 the joining of the hosts of the Elves, but this the Eldar say 
 he would not even so have achieved, had not the captains       
 of Men in the hosts of Maidros turned and fled, and their 
 number was very great. Treachery or cowardice or both          
 was the cause of that grievous wrong. But worse is to tell, 
 for the swart Men, whom Uldor the Accursed led, went          
 over to the foe and fell upon Maidros' flank. From that day 
 were Elves estranged from Men, unless it be from the chil- 
 dren of the children of Hador.(18)                             
   There Finweg fell in flame of swords, and a fire it is said 
 burst from his helm when it was cloven; but he was beaten      
 to the earth and his white banners were trodden under foot. 
 Then the army of the West, sundered from Maidros, fell         
 back as best it could win its way, step by step, towards the 
 Shadowy Mountains or even the dreadful fringes of Taur-       
 na-Fuin. But Hurin did not retreat, and he held the rear-      
 guard, and all the Men of Hithlum and his brother Huor        
 were there slain about him in a heap, so that not one came  
 back with tidings to their home. The valiant stand of Hurin 
 is still remembered by the Elves, for by it was Turgon en- 
 abled to cleave his way from the field and save part of his 
 battle, and rescue his people from the hills, and escape       
 southward to Sirion. Renowned in song is the axe of Hurin      
 that slew a hundred Orcs, but the magic helm that Gumlin        

 

                                                               
                                                                 
 his  sire  bequeathed  him  he  did not  wear that  day. Thereon 
 was  set  in  mockery  the  image  of the  head of  Glomund, and 
 oft  it  had  gone  into  victory,  so that  the Men  of Hithlum 
 said:  We  have  a  dragon  of  more worth  than theirs.  It was 
 Telchar's  work,  the  great  smithy of  Belegost, but  it would 
 not  have  availed  Hurin  on  that  field,  for by  the command 
 of  Morgoth  he  was  taken  alive,   grasped  by   the  hideous 
 arms  of  the  uncounted  Orcs,  till  he  was   buried  beneath 
 them.                                                            
                                                                 
   Maidros  and  the  sons  of  Feanor  wrought  great  slaughter 
 on  Orc  and Balrog  and traitor  Man that  day, but  the dragon 
 they did not slay and the fire of  his breath  was the  death of 
 many.  And  they  were  driven  in  the  end  far away,  and the 
 Gorge  of  Aglon  was  filled   with  Orcs   and  the   hill  of 
 Himling  with  the  people  of  Morgoth. But  the seven  sons of 
 Feanor, though each was wounded, were not slain. o               
   Great  was  the  triumph  of  Morgoth. The  bodies of  his en- 
 emies that were slain were piled in  a mound  like a  great hill 
 upon  Dor-na-Fauglith,  but  there  the  grass  came   and  grew 
 green in that place alone in all the desert,  and no  Orc there- 
 after   trod   upon   the  earth   beneath  which   the  Gnomish 
 swords  crumbled  into  rust.  The  realm   of  Finweg   was  no 
 more,  the sons  of Feanor  wandered in  the East,  fugitives in 
 the   Blue  Mountains.   The  armies   of  Angband   ranged  all 
 the  North.  To  Hithlum  Morgoth  sent  Men  who were  his ser- 
 vants  or  afraid  of  him.  South  and  East  his Orcs  went in 
 plunder  and  ruin-,  well  nigh  all  Broseliand (22) they overran. 
 Doriath  yet  held  where  Thingol  lived, and  Nargothrond. But 
 he  heeded  these  not  much  as  yet,  maybe  because  he  knew 
 little of  them. But  one thing  grievously marred  his triumph, 
 and great was  his wrath  when he  thought of  it. This  was the 
 escape  of  Turgon,  and  in  no  way  could  he  learn  whither 
 that king had gone."                                             
   Hurin  was  now  brought  before   Morgoth  and   defied  him. 
 He  was   chained  in   torment.  Afterward   Morgoth  remember- 
 ing that treachery or the fear of it, and especially the treach- 
 ery  of  Men,  alone  would  work  the  ruin"  of   the  Gnomes, 

 

 came  to Hurin  and offered  him honour  and freedom  and a                   


87 

 wealth of jewels, if he would lead an army  against Turgon,                   
 or even tell him whither that  king had  gone; for  he knew                   
 that  Hurin  was  close  in  the  counsels  of the  sons of                   
 Fingolfin.  But  Hurin  mocked  him. Therefore  Morgoth de-                   
 vised  a  cruel  punishment.  Upon  the  highest   peak  of                   
 Thangorodrim  he  set him  chained upon  a chair  of stone,                   
 and he cursed him with a curse of never-sleeping sight like                   
 unto the Gods, but his kin and seed he  cursed with  a fate                   
 of  sorrow  and ill-chance,  and bade  Hurin sit  there and                   
 watch the unfolding of it.                                                    
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
 The first part of this section was heavily but  hastily and  roughly emended, 
 on top of the careful alterations that belong to an earlier 'layer'. In three 
 of the following notes (7, 14, 15) I give the final text of the passages that 
 were most changed.                                                            
                                                                              
  1. Scribbled  in  the margin  is Swarthy  Men, apparently  with a  mark of 
     insertion to this point in the narrative.                                 
  2. the towers of Thu > Sauron's tower (late change).                        
  3.  This   sentence   emended   to   read:   The   Dark-elves   were  summoned 
     again  from afar,  and Men  of the  East were  gathered together;  and the 
     forces  of Maidros  sallied forth  from Himling  (late change).  Himling > 
     Himring subsequently.                                                     
                                                                              
  4. Finweg > Fingon throughout, as previously.                              
  5. Added  here:  Yet  less  was  the  aid  that  Maidros  had  of   Men  than 
     should  have  been,  because of  the wounding  of Beren  in the  wood; and 
     (Orodreth would nor march, &c.)                                           
  6. Celegorm  >  Celegorn  at  both  occurrences  (this  change  has  not been 
     made previously).                                                         
  7. This  paragraph,  after  the  changes  given in  notes 4-6,  was rewritten 
     later (introducing the later story of the  foundation of  Gondolin), thus: 
                                                                              
          All the hosts of Hithlum, Gnomes and Men, were ready to his sum      
       mons; and Fingon and Huor and Hurin were their chiefs. And              
       Turgon  himself  deeming  that  haply  the hour  of deliverance  was at 
       hand  came  forth  himself  unlooked  for,  and  he  brought   a  great 
       army, and they  encamped before  the West  Pass in  sight of  the walls 
       of  Hithlum,  and  there  was  joy  among  the  people  of  Fingon  his 
       brother.  [An  addition  here  was struck  out, no  doubt at  the time 
       of writing,  and replaced  by a  different statement  about the  folk of 

 

       Haleth  below:  The  folk  of  Haleth  made ready  in the  forest of 
       Brethil.] Yet less was the aid that Maidros had  of Men  than should 
       have been, because of the  wounding of  Beren in  the wood;  for the 
       folk of Haleth abode in the forest, and few  came to  war. Orodreth, 
       moreover,  would  not  march  from  Narog  at  the word  of Maidros, 
       because  of  the death  of Felagund,  and the  deeds of  Curufin and 
       Celegorn.  Yet  he  suffered  a  small company  of the  bravest, who 
       would not endure to be idle when great war was  afoot, to  go North. 
       Their leader was Gwindor son of Guilin, a  very valiant  prince; but 
       they took the devices of the house  of Fingon  and went  beneath his 
       banners, and came never back, save one.                               
                                                                            
  8.  From Doriath none came > From Doriath too came scanty aid.            
  9.  Added here: and the anguish of Luthien                                 
 10.  greed > covetice                                                       
  11. beginning to ponder > already beginning to devise (late change).       
  12. This sentence changed to read: vowed aloud to slay Thingol, and de- 
      stroy his folk, if they came victorious from war, and the jewel were 
      not yielded of free-will                                               
  13. Thingol went not forth > Thingol fortified his realm, and went not 
      forth                                                                  
  14. From the beginning of the preceding paragraph (Now came the            
      day ...) the text was extensively rewritten in the later 'layer' of 
      change:                                                                
                                                                            


88 

       At  length  having gathered  at last  all the  strength that  he might 
       Maidros  appointed  a  day,  and  sent  word  to  Fingon  and  Turgon. 
       Now  for a  while the  Gnomes had  victory, and  the Orcs  were driven 
       out  of  Beleriand,  and  hope  was  renewed;  but  Morgoth  was aware 
       of all that was done, and he took counsel against their  uprising, and 
       he  sent  forth  his  spies and  emissaries among  Elves and  Men, but 
       especially  did  these  come  unto the  Swarthy Men,  and to  the sons 
       of Ulfang. Upon  the East  under the  banner of  Maidros were  all the 
       folk of the sons of  Feanor, and  they were  many; and  the Dark-elves 
       coming  from  the  South  were  with  him, and  the battalions  of the 
       Easterlings,  with  the  sons  of  Bor  and  Ulfang.  But  Fingon  and 
       Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum  and  such as  came from  the Falas 
       and  from  Nargothrond  were  gathered  ready  in  the  West  upon the 
       borders  of  the  Thirsty Plain,  waiting under  the banner  of Fingon 
       for  the  signal  of  the  advancing  standards  from  the  East.  But 
       Maidros  was  delayed  upon  the  road  by  the machinations  of Uldor 
       the  Accursed  son  of  Ulfang,  and  ever  the  secret   emissaries  of 
       Morgoth  went  among  the  camps,  thrall-Gnomes  or things  in elvish 
       form, and spread foreboding and thoughts of treason.                  
         Long the army  waited in  the West,  and fear  of treachery  grew in 

 

    their thought, when Maidros came not. Then the hot hearts                    
    Fingon and Turgon became impatient.                                   
                                                                                
 15. This passage, from Flinding, it is said, was changed by late emenda-         
                                                                                
 tion to read:                                                              
                                                                          
        Gwindor son of Guilin, it is said, and the men of Nargothrond        
        were in the forefront of the battle and burst within the gates; and      
        they slew the Orcs in the very halls of Morgoth, and fear came on       
        Morgoth on his throne. But at the last Gwindor and his men were        
    all slain or taken, for no help came to them.                               
                                                                                
 16. Added here: Nirnaith Arnediad (late change).                                 
 17. Added here: since the second battle of the North.                            
 18. Added here: and of Beor (late change).                                       
 19. But Hurin did not retreat > But there Hurin turned to bay                    
 20. The following passage was added here:                                        
                                                                                
    But their arms were scattered, and their folk minished and dis-               
    persed and their league broken; and they took to a wild and wood-            
    land life, beneath the feet of Eryd-luin [later > Ered-luin], mingling       
    with the Dark-elves, and forgetting their power and glory of old.            
                                                                                
 21. wandered in the East, fugitives in the Blue Mountains > wandered as          
     leaves before the wind.                                                         
 22. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                                       
 23. The following passage was added here:                                        
                                                                                
    and his anger was the greater, for it is said that of all the Gnomes            
    he feared and hated most the house and people of Fingolfin, who                
    had harkened never to his lies and blandishments, and came into                 
    the North, as has been told, only out of loyalty to their kin.               
                                                                                
 24. the ruin > the final ruin                                                     
                                                                                
                                      12.                                         
                                                                                
     Morwen (1) the wife of Hurin was left in Hithlum and with               
 her were but two old  men too  old for  war, and maidens and                   
 young boys. One of these was Hurin's child, Turin son of                        
 Hurin renowned  in song.  But Morwen  was with  child once                      
 more, and so she stayed and mourned  in Hithlum,  and went                      
 not like Rian wife of Huor to seek for tidings of her lord.                     
 The  Men'  of the  faithful race  were slain,  and Morgoth                      

 

 drove  thither  in  their  stead  those  who  had  betrayed the 
 Elves,  and  he  penned  them  behind  the  Shadowy  Mountains, 


89 

 and  slew  them  if  they  wandered  to Broseliand (3) or beyond; 
 and  such  was  all they  got of  the love  and rewards  he had 
 promised them. Yet their hearts were turned to evil, and lit- 
 tie  love  they  showed to  the women  and children  of the 
 faithful  who  had  been slain,  and most  of them  they en- 
 slaved. Great was the courage and majesty of Morwen, and 
 many  were  afraid  of  her,  and  whispered  that  she  had 
 learned  black  magics  of  the  Gnomes.4  But  she   was  poor 
 and  well  nigh  alone,  and  was  succoured  in secret  by her 
 kinswoman  Airin  whom  Brodda,  one   of  the   incoming  Men, 
 and  mighty  among  them,  had  taken  to  wife.  Wherefore  it 
 came  into  her  heart  to  send  Turin,  who  was  then  seven 
 years of age, to Thingol,  that he  might not  grow up  a churl 
 or  servant;  for  Hurin  and  Beren had  been friends  of old. 
 The fate of Turin is told in  the 'Children  of Hurin',  and it 
 need not in  full be  told here,  though it  is wound  with the 
 fates of the Silmarils and the Elves. It is called the  Tale of 
 Grief, for it is very sorrowful, and in it  are seen  the worst 
 of the deeds of Morgoth Bauglir.                                
    Turin  grew  up  in Thingol's  court, but  after a  while as 
 Morgoth's  power  grew   news  came   no  more   from  Hithlum, 
 for  it was  a long  and perilous  road, and  he heard  no more 
 of  Nienor  his sister  who was  born after  he left  his home, 
 nor  of  Morwen  his  mother;  and  his  heart  was   dark  and 
 heavy.  He  was often  in battle  on the  borders of  the realm 
 where  Beleg  the  Bowman was  his friend,  and he  came little 
 to the court, and wild  and unkempt  was his  hair and  his at- 
 tire, though sweet his voice  and sad  his song.  On a  time at 
 the table of the king he was  taunted by  a foolish  Elf, Orgof 
 by  name,  with  his rough  garb and  strange looks.  And Orgof 
 in   jest   slighted  the   maidens  and   wives  of   the  Men 
 of  Hithlum.  But  Turin  unwitting  of  his  growing  strength 
 slew Orgof with a drinking vessel at the king's board.          
    He  fled  then  the  court, and  thinking himself  an outlaw 
 took  to war  against all,  Elves, Men,  or Orcs,  that crossed 
 the path of  the desperate  band he  gathered upon  the borders 

 

 of  the  kingdom,  hunted  Men  and  Ilkorins and  Gnomes. One 
 day,  when  he  was  not  among them,  his men  captured Beleg 
 the  Bowman  and  tied  him  to  a tree,  and would  have slain 
 him; but  Turin returning  was smitten  with remorse,  and re- 
 leased  Beleg  and forswore  war or  plunder against  all save 
 the  Orcs.  From  Beleg  he learned  that Thingol  had pardoned 
 his deed the day that it was done. Still he  went not  back to 
 the  Thousand  Caves;  but  the  deeds that  were done  on the 
 marches  of  Doriath  by  Beleg  and  Turin  were   noised  in 
 Thingol's halls, and in Angband they were known.              
   Now  one  of  Turin's  band  was  Blodrin  son  of   Ban,  a 
 Gnome,'  but  he  had  lived  long  with  the Dwarves  and was 
 of evil heart and  joined Turin  for the  love of  plunder. He 
 loved  little the  new life  in which  wounds were  more plen- 
 tiful than booty. In the end he betrayed the  hiding-places of 
 Turin' to the Orcs, and the camp of Turin was surprised.      
 Blodrin was slain by a chance arrow of his evil allies  in the 
 gloom,  but  Turin  was  taken  alive, as  Hurin had  been, by 
 the  command  of  Morgoth.  For  Morgoth  began  to  fear  that 
 in  Doriath  behind  the  mazes  of  Melian,  where  his deeds 
 were  hidden  from  him,  save  by  report,(7) Turin  would cheat 
 the doom  that he  had devised.  Beleg was  left for  dead be- 
 neath  a  heap  of  slain.  There  he  was found  by Thingol's 
 messengers  who  came  to  summon  them  to  a  feast  in  the 
 Thousand  Caves.  Taken  back  thither  he  was healed  by Me- 
 lian, and set off  alone to  track Turin.  Beleg was  the most 
 marvellous  of  all  woodsmen  that  have  ever  been,  and his 
 skill was little less than Huan  in the  following of a trail, 
 though  he followed  by eye  and cunning  not by  scent. None- 
 theless  he  was  bewildered  in  the  mazes of  Deadly Night- 
 shade  and wandered  there in  despair, until  he saw  the lamp 
 of  Flinding  Fuilin's son,(8) who had  escaped from  the mines 


90 

 of  Morgoth,  a  bent  and  timid  shadow  of his  former shape 
 and  mood.  From  Flinding  he  learned  news  of  the  Orc-band 
 that  had  captured  Turin;  and  it  had  delayed  long  in the 
 lands  plundering  East  among  Men,  but   was  now   come in 
 great  haste,  owing  to  the  angry  message of  Morgoth, and 
 was  passing  along the  Orc-road through  Taur-na-Fuin itself. 

 

                                                                            
                                                                             
      Near the issuing of this road, where  it reaches  the edge              
  of the forest upon the face of the steep'  slopes that  lie to              
  the south of  the Thirsty  Plain, Flinding  and Beleg  lay and              
  watched the  Orcs go  by. When  the Orcs  left the  forest and              
  went far down the slopes to camp in  a bare  dale in  sight of              
  Thangorodrim,  Beleg  and  his  companion  followed  them.  At              
  night  Beleg  shot  the  wolf-sentinels  of the  Orc-camp, and              
  stole with Flinding into its midst.  With the  greatest diffi-              
  culty and direst peril they lifted Turin, senseless in a sleep              
  of  utter  weariness,  and  brought  him out  of the  camp and              
  laid him in a dell of thick thorn trees high  up on  the hill-              
  side. In striking" off the bonds  Beleg pricked  Turin's foot;              
  and he,  roused in  sudden fear  and anger,  for the  Orcs had              
  often  tormented  him, found  himself free.  Then in  his mad-              
  ness he  seized Beleg's  sword, and  slew his  friend thinking              
  him a foe. The covering of  Flinding's lamp  fell off  at that              
  moment,  and  Turin  saw  Beleg's face;  and his  madness left              
  him and he was turned as to stone.                                          
      The Orcs, awakened  by his  cries as  he leaped  on Beleg,              
  discovered the escape of Turin, but were  scattered by  a ter-              
  rible storm of thunder and a  deluge of  rain. In  the morning              
  Flinding  saw  them  marching  away  over  the  steaming sands              
  of  Dor-na-Fauglith.  But  through  all  the  storm  Turin sat              
  without  movement;  and scarcely  could he  be roused  to help              
  in the burying of Beleg  and his  bow in  the dell  of thorns.              
  Flinding  afterwards  led  him,  dazed and  unwitting, towards              
  safety;  and  his  mind  was  healed  when  he  drank  of  the              
  spring of Narog  by Ivrin's  lake. For  his frozen  tears were              
  loosed, and he wept,  and after  his weeping  made a  song for              
  Beleg,  the  Bowman's  Friendship,   which  became   a  battle              
  song of the foes of Morgoth.                                                
                                                                             
                                       *                                      
                                                                             
  1. Written in the margin against the opening of this section is Take in 
     Helm of Gumlin from page 34. Page  34 in  the typescript  contains the 
     passage concerning the Helm in $11, p. 142.                            
  2. The Men > Most of the Men                                            
  3. Broseliand > Beleriand, as previously.                                  

 

                                                                                 
                                                                                 
  4. whispered that she had learned black magics from the Gnomes >                 
   whispered that she was a witch (late change).                                  
  5. a Gnome > a Gnome of Feanor's house                                           
  6. the hiding-places of Turin > the hiding-places of Turin beyond the           
   eaves of Doriath                                                                
  7. save by report > or upon its borders whence came but uncertain re-           
  port                                                                            
  8. Flinding Fuilin's son > Gwindor son of Guilin, and subsequently    
   Flinding > Gwindor (late changes; see 511 note 15).                             
  9. steep > long                                                                  
 10. Added after high up on the hillside:                                         
                                                                                 
        Then  Beleg  drew his  renowned sword,  made of  iron that  fell from 
        heaven as a blazing star, and it would cut all earth-dolven iron. But 
        fate was that day more strong, for in striking, &c.                       
                                                                                 
                                       13.                                        
                                                                                 


91 

    Flinding' led Turin in the end to Nargothrond. There in                      
  days long gone' Flinding had loved Finduilas daughter of                       
  Orodreth, and he called her Failivrin, which is the gleam on                    
  the waters of the fair lake whence Narog comes. But her,                        
  heart was turned against her will to Turin, and his to her.                     
  Out of loyalty' he fought against his love and Finduilas                        
  grew wan and pale, but Flinding perceiving their hearts                         
  grew bitter.                                                                    
    Turin grew great and mighty in Nargothrond, but he                           
  loved not their secret manner of fighting and ambush, and                       
  began to long for brave strokes and battle in the open. Then                    
  he caused to be forged anew the sword of Beleg, and the                         
  craftsmen of Narog made thereof a black blade with shining                      
  edges of pale fire; from which sword he became known                            
  among them as Mormaglir.(4)                                                      
    With this sword he thought to avenge the death of Beleg                      
  the Bowman, and with it he did many mighty deeds; so that                       
  the fame of Mormaglir, the Black-sword of Nargothrond,                          
  came even unto Doriath and to the ears of Thingol, but the                      
  name of Turin was not heard. And long victory dwelt with                      
  Mormaglir and the host of the Gnomes of Nargothrond who                      
  followed him; and their realm reached even to the sources                     

 

                                                              
                                                               
 of Narog, and from the western sea  to the  marches of         
 Doriath; and there was a stay in the onset of Morgoth.         
                                                               
      In this time of respite and hope Morwen arose,  and leav- 
 ing her goods  in the  care of  Brodda, who  had to  wife' her 
 kinswoman  Airin,  she  took  with  her  Nienor  her daughter, 
 and  adventured  the  long journey  to Thingol's  halls. There 
 did new grief await her, for she learnt of  the loss  and van- 
 ishing of Turin; and even as she  dwelt a  while as  the guest 
 of  Thingol, in  sorrow and  in doubt,  there came  to Doriath 
 the tidings of the fall of Nargothrond; whereat all folk wept. 
      Biding  his  hour  Morgoth  had loosed  upon the  folk of 
 Narog  at unawares  a great  army that  he had  long prepared, 
 and  with  the  host  came  that father  of the  dragons, Glo- 
 mund,   who  wrought   ruin  in   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered 
 Tears.   The  might   of  Narog   was  overwhelmed   upon  the 
 Guarded  Plain, north  of Nargothrond;  and there  fell Flind- 
 ing son  of Fuilin,(6) mortally wounded,  and dying  he refused 
 the succour  of Turin,  reproaching him,  and bidding  him, if 
 he would amend the  evil he  had wrought  his friend,  to has- 
 ten back to Nargothrond to rescue  even with  his life,  if he 
 could, Finduilas whom they loved, or to slay her else.         
      But  the  Orc-host  and  the  mighty  dragon   came  upon 
 Nargothrond before  Turin could  put it  in defence,  and they 
 overthrew  Orodreth  and  all  his  remaining  folk,  and  the 
 great  halls  beneath  the  earth  were sacked  and plundered, 
 and  all  the  women  and maidens  of the  folk of  Narog were 
 herded  as  slaves  and taken  into Morgoth's  thraldom. Turin 
 only  they  could  not overcome,  and the  Orcs fell  back be- 
 fore him in terror and amaze,  and he  stood alone.  Thus ever 
 did  Morgoth  achieve  the  downfall  of  men  by   their  own 
 deeds;  for but  little would  men have  accounted the  woe of 
 Turin  had  he  fallen  in  brave  defence  before  the mighty 
 doors of Nargothrond.                                          
      Fire was in the eyes of Turin, and the edges of his sword 
 shone  as  with  flame,  and  he  strode  to battle  even with 
 Glomund,  alone and  unafraid. But  it was  not his  fate that 
 day to rid the world of that creeping evil;  for he  fell under 

 

 the  binding spell  of the  lidless eyes  of Glomund,  and he 
 was  halted  moveless;  but  Glomund (7) taunted  him,  calling 
 him deserter of his kin,  friend-slayer, and  love-thief. And 
 -the dragon offered him his freedom either to  follow seeking 
 to rescue his 'stolen love' Finduilas, or to do his  duty and 


92 

 go to the rescue of his  mother and  sister, who  were living 
 in great misery in Hithlum (as he said and lied) and  nigh to 
 death. But he must swear to abandon one or the other.        
   Then  Turin  in  anguish  and  in  doubt  forsook Finduilas 
 against his  heart, and  against his  last word  to Flinding (8) 
 (which if he had obeyed, his uttermost fate had  not befallen 
 him),  and  believing the  words of  the serpent  whose spell 
 was upon him, he left the realm of Narog and went to         
 Hithlum. And it is sung that he stopped in  vain his  ears to 
 keep out the echo of the  cries of  Finduilas calling  on his 
 name  as  she  was  borne  away; and  that sound  hunted him: 
 through  the  woods.  But  Glomund,  when  Turin   had  gone, 
 crept  back  to  Nargothrond  and  gathered unto  himself the 
 greater  part  of its  wealth of  gold and  gems, and  he lay 
 thereon in its deepest hall, and desolation was about him. 
   It is said that  Turin came  at length  to Hithlum,  and he 
 found not his mother  or his  kin; for  their hall  was empty 
 and their land despoiled,  and Brodda  had added  their goods 
 unto  his  own. In  his wooden  hall at  his own  board Turin 
 slew  Brodda; and  fought his  way from  the house,  but must 
 needs afterward flee from Hithlum.(9)                        
                                                             
   There was  a dwelling  of free  Men in  the wood,  the rem- 
 nant of the people of Haleth, son of Hador and brother of 
 Gumlin the grandsire of Turin. They  were the  last of  the  
 Men that were Elf-friends to linger  in Beleriand,(10) neither 
 subdued by Morgoth, nor penned in Hithlum beyond the         
 Shadowy  Mountains.   They  were   small  in   numbers,  but 
 bold, and their houses were in  the green  woods about  the  
 River Taiglin that enters the  land of  Doriath ere  it joins 
 with the great waters of Sirion, and maybe some magic of 
 Melian had yet protected them. Down from the sources of      
 Taiglin  that  issues  from   the  Shadowy   Mountains  Turin 

 

   
                                                                   
  came  seeking  for  the  trail  of  the  Orcs  that  had plundered 
  Nargothrond  and  must  pass  that  water  on  their road  back to 
  the realm of Morgoth.                                             
      Thus  he  came  upon  the  woodmen  and  learned   tidings  of 
  Finduilas; and  then he  thought that  he had  tasted his  fill of 
  woe,  yet  it  was  not  so.  For  the  Orcs  had marched  nigh to 
  the   borders   of   the   woodmen,  and   the  woodmen   had  am- 
  bushed  them,  and  come  near  to  rescuing  their  captives. But 
  few  had  they  won  away,  for  the  Orc-guards  had  slain  most 
  of   them   cruelly;   and   among   them   Finduilas   had   been 
  pierced  with  spears,(11) as  those  few  who  had been  saved told 
  him  amid  their  tears.  So  perished  the  last  of the  race of 
  Finrod  fairest  of  Elven-kings, and  vanished from  the world 
 of Men.                                                            
         Grim was the heart  of Turin  and all  the deeds  and days 
 of his life seemed vile; yet the  courage of  the race  of Hador 
 was  as  a  core  of  unbent  steel. There  Turin vowed  to re- 
 nounce  his  past, his  kin, his  name, and  all that  had been 
 his,  save  hatred   of  Morgoth;   and  he   took  a   new  name, 
 Turambar   (Turumarth (12) in the   forms   of   Gnomish  speech), 
 which  is  Conqueror  of  Fate;  and   the  woodmen   gathered  to 
 him,  and  he  became  their  lord,  and ruled  a while  in peace. 
 Tidings  came  now  more  clear   to  Doriath   of  the   fall  of 
 Orodreth  and  the  destruction   of  all   the  folk   of  Narog, 
 though  fugitives   no  more   than  could   be  counted   on  the 
 hands  came  ever  into  safety  there,  and  uncertain  was their 
 report.  Yet  thus  was  it  known  to   Thingol  and   to  Morwen 
 that  Mormaglir  was  Turin;  and  yet  too  late;  for  some said 
 that  he  had  escaped  and  fled,'  and  some  told  that  he had 
 been  turned  to  stone  by  the  dreadful  eyes  of  Glomund  and 
 lived still enthralled in Nargothrond.                             
         At last Thingol yielded so far to the tears and entreaties 
 of  Morwen  that  he  sent  forth  a   company  of   Elves  toward 


93 

 Nargothrond  to  explore  the  truth.   With  them   rode  Morwen, 
 for  she  might  not  be  restrained;  but  Nienor  was  bidden to 
 remain  behind.  Yet  the  fearlessness  of  her  house  was hers, 
 and  in  evil  hour, for  love and  care of  her mother,  she dis- 

 

  guised herself as one  of the  folk of  Thingol, and  went with 
  that ill-fated riding.                                          
    They viewed Narog afar from the summit of the tree-clad       
  Hill of  Spies to  the east  of the  Guarded Plain,  and thence 
  they rode down greatly daring towards the banks of Narog.       
  Morwen   remained  upon   the  hill   with  scanty   guard  and 
  watched  them  from  afar.  Now  in  the  days of  victory when 
  the  folk  of  Narog  had  gone  forth once  more to  open war, 
  a bridge had been built across  the river  before the  doors of 
  the hidden city (and this had proved their undoing).            
  Towards this bridge the Elves of Doriath now came, but          
  Glomund  was  aware  of their  coming, and  he issued  forth on 
  a sudden and lay into the stream,  and a  vast and  hissing va- 
  pour  arose  and  engulfed  them.  This  Morwen  saw  from  the 
  hill-top, and her guards would  not stay  longer but  fled back 
  to Doriath taking her with them.                                
    In  that  mist   the  Elves   were  overwhelmed,   and  their 
  horses  were  stricken  with  panic, and  they fled  hither and 
  thither and could not find  their fellows;  and the  most part 
  returned never back to Doriath. But when the mist cleared       
  Nienor  found  that  her  wandering  had  taken  her  only back 
  unto  the  banks  of  Narog,  and before  her lay  Glomund, and 
  his eye was upon her. Dreadful was  his eye,  like to  the eye 
  of  Morgoth  his  master  who   had  made   him,  and   as  she 
  gazed perforce upon it a spell of darkness and utter forget-  
  fulness  fell  upon her  mind. Thence  she wandered  witless in 
  the woods, as a wild creature without speech or thought.        
    When  her  madness  left her,  she was  far from  the borders 
  of  Nargothrond,  she  knew  not  where;  and   she  remembered 
  not  her  name  or  home.  Thus  was  she found  by a  band of 
  Orcs  and  pursued  as  a  beast  of  the  woods;  but  she was 
  saved  by  fate.  For  a party  of the  woodmen of  Turambar in 
  whose  land  they  were  fell  upon  the  Orcs  and  slew them; 
  and  Turambar  himself  placed her  upon his  horse and  bore  
  her to the woodmen's pleasant homes. He named her               
  Niniel, Tear-maiden, for he had first seen her weeping.         
  There is a  narrow gorge  and a  high and  foaming fall  in the 
  river Taiglin, that the woodmen called the Falls of Silver- 

 

 bowl;(14) and this  fair place  they passed  as they  rode home, 
 and  would  camp  there as  they were  wont; but  Niniel would 
 not stay, for a chill and a mortal shivering took her  in that 
 place.                                                         
   Yet  afterwards  she found  some peace  in the  dwellings of 
 the  woodmen,  who  treated  her  with kindliness  and honour. 
 There  she  won the  love of  Brandir, son  of Handir,  son of 
 Haleth; but he was lame of foot, being wounded by an Orc- 
 arrow as a child, and uncomely and of less might than      
 many, wherefore he had yielded the rule to Turin at the 
 choice of the woodfolk. He was gentle of heart and wise of 
 thought, and great was his love, and he was ever true to 
 Turambar; yet bitter was his soul when he might not win 
 the love of Niniel. For Niniel would not be parted ever 
 from  the side  of Turambar,  and great  love was  ever be- 
 tween those twain from the hour of  their first  meeting. Thus 
 Turin  Turambar  thinking  to  cast off  his ancient  woes was 
 wed to  Nienor Niniel,  and fair  was the  feast in  the woods 
 of Taiglin.                                                    
   Now  the  power  and  malice  of  Glomund  waxed  apace  and 
 well-nigh all the realm of Nargothrond of  old he  laid waste, 
 both west of Narog and  beyond it  to the  east; and  he gath- 
 ered  Orcs  to  him  and  ruled  as  a dragon-king;  and there 
 were battles on  the marches  of the  woodmen's land,  and the 
 Orcs  fled.  Wherefore  learning  of  their  dwelling, Glomund 


94 

 issued  from  Nargothrond,  and  came  crawling,  filled  with 
 fire,  over  the  lands  and to  the borders  of the  woods of 
 Taiglin,  leaving  behind   him  a   trail  of   burning.  But 
 Turambar  pondered  how  the  horror  could  be   warded  from 
 his  people; and  he marched  forth with  his men,  and Niniel 
 rode with  them, her  heart foreboding  ill, until  they could 
 descry afar the blasted track  of the  dragon and  the smoking 
 place  where  he  now  lay,  west  of  the deep-cloven  bed of 
 Taiglin. Between  them lay  the steep  ravine of  the river, 
 whose waters had in that spot fallen, but a little way before, 
 over the foaming fall of Silver-bowl.                          
     There  Turambar  thought  of a  desperate counsel,  for he 
 knew  but  too  well  the  might  and  malice  of  Glomund. He 

 

 resolved to lie in wait in  the ravine  over which  the dragon 
 must pass, if he would reach  their land.  Six of  his boldest 
 men  begged  to  come with  him; and  at evening  they climbed 
 up the further side of the  ravine and  clung in  hiding among 
 the bushes at its brink. In the night  the great  dragon moved 
 nigh  to  the  river, and  the rumour  of his  approach filled 
 them with fear  and loathing.  Indeed in  the morning  all had 
 slunk away leaving Turambar only.                             
   The next evening, when Turambar was now nearly spent,      
 Glomund  began  the  passage  of  the  ravine,  and  his  huge 
 form  passed  over  Turambar's  head.  There  Turambar  trans- 
 fixed  Glomund  with  Gurtholfin,  Wand-of-Death,   his  black 
 sword;  and  Glomund  coiled  back  in  anguish and  lay dying 
 nigh  to the  river's brink  and came  not into  the woodmen's 
 land.  But  he wrested  the sword  from Turambar's  grasp in 
 his  throes,  and  Turambar  came now  forth from  hiding, and 
 placed  his  foot  upon  Glomund  and  in exultation  drew out 
 his  sword.  Greedy  was  that  blade  and  very  fast  in the 
 wound, and as  Turambar wrenched  it with  all his  might, the 
 venom  of  the  dragon  spouted  on  his hand  and in  the an- 
 guish of its burning he fell in a swoon.                      
   So it was that the watchers from afar perceived that        
 Glomund had been slain,'yet Turambar did not return. By       
 the light  of the  moon Niniel  went forth  without a  word to 
 seek  him,  and  ere she  had long  gone Brandir  missed her 
 and followed  after. But  Niniel found  Turambar lying  as one 
 dead  beside  the  body  of  Glomund.  There  as she  wept be- 
 side  Turambar  and  sought  to   tend  him,   Glomund  opened 
 his eyes for the last time, and spake, telling her  the true. 
 name  of  Turambar;  and  thereafter  he  died,  and  with his 
 death the spell of forgetfulness was  lifted from  Niniel, and 
 she remembered  her kin.  Filled with  horror and  anguish, for 
 she  was  with  child,  she  fled  and  cast herself  over the 
 heights  of  Silver-bowl, and  none ever  found her  body. Her 
 last lament ere she cast herself away was heard only by       
 Brandir;  and  his  back was  bowed and  his head  turned grey 
 in that night.                                                
   In  the  morn  Turin  awoke  and found  that one  had tended 

 

                                                                               
                                                                               
  his hand.  Though it  pained him  grievously, he  returned in                 
  triumph filled with  joy for  the death  of Glomund,  his an-                 
  cient foe; and he asked for Niniel, but none dared  tell him,                 
  save Brandir.  And Brandir  distraught with  grief reproached                 
  him;  wherefore  Turin  slew him,  and taking  Gurtholfin red                 
  with blood bade it slay  its master;  and the  sword answered                 
  that his blood was as sweet as any other, and it  pierced him                 
  to the heart as he fell upon it.                                              
      Turin they buried nigh  to the  edge of  Silver-bowl, and                 
  his  name  Turin  Turambar  was  carved  there  upon  a rock.                 
  Beneath  was  written  Nienor  Niniel.  Men changed  the name                 
  of that place thereafter to Nen-Girith, the Shuddering Water.                 
      So ended the tale of Turin the unhappy;  and it  has ever                 
  been held the worst of the  works of  Morgoth in  the ancient                 


95 

  world.  Some  have  said  that  Morwen,   wandering  woefully                 
  from  Thingol's  halls, when  she found  Neinor not  there on                 
  her return, came on a  time to  that stone  and read  it, and                 
  there died.                                                                   
                                                                               
                                       *                                        
                                                                               
  1. Flinding > Gwindor at all occurrences, as previously (late changes). 
  2. in days long gone > in days before (late change).                      
  3. Out of loyalty > Out of loyalty to Gwindor (late change).                   
  4. Added here: but the sword he named Gurtholfin, Wand-of-Death.                
  5. The  words  Brodda, who  had to  wife struck  through (late  change), so 
       the sentence  reads leaving  her goods  in the  care of  her kinswoman 
       Airin                                                                    
  6. Flinding son of Fuilin > Gwindor son of Guilin (late change).               
       This passage, from and he was halted moveless, was extended:             
                                                                               
          and long  time he  stood there  as one  graven of  stone silent  before the 
          dragon,   until   they   two   alone   were  left   before  the   doors  of 
          Nargothrond. Then Glomund taunted him, &c.                            
                                                                               
  8. and against his last word to Flinding struck though.                        
  9. This sentence rewritten to read:                                            
                                                                               
          Then Turin knew the lie of Glomund, and  in his  anguish and  in his 
          wrath for the evil that had been done to his  mother he  slew Brodda 
          at his  own board  and fought  his way  from the  house; and  in the 
          night, a hunted man, he fled from Hithlum.                             

 

                                      
                                                                            
 10. Beleriand here as originally typed, not emended from Broseliand; and 
     subsequently.                                                           
 11.  and  among them  Finduilas had  been pierced  > and  Finduilas they 
     fastened to a tree and pierced                                          
 12. Turumarth > Turamarth                                                    
 13. This passage, from came ever into safety there, was altered thus;        
                                                                            
       ... came ever into safety in Doriath. Thus was  it known  to Thingol 
       and to Morwen that  Mormaglir was  Turin himself;  and yet  too late 
       they learned this; for some said that he was  slain, and  some told, 
       &c.                                                                   
                                                                            
 14. Ealls  of  Silver-bowl  >  Falls of  Celebros, Foam-silver;  and subse- 
     quently Silver-bowl > Celebros.                                         
                                                                            
                                     14.                                     
                                                                            
   But  after  the  death of  Turin and  Nienor, Hurin  was re-              
 leased  by  Morgoth,  for  Morgoth thought  still to  use him;              
 and  he  accused  Thingol  of  faint  heart and  ungentleness,              
 saying  that  only thus  had his  purpose been  brought about;              
 and  Hurin  distraught,  wandering  bowed  with   grief,  pon-              
 dered these words,  and was  embittered by  them, for  such is              
 the way of the lies of Morgoth.                                             
   Hurin  gathered  therefore  a  few  outlaws  of   the  woods              
 unto  him,  and  they  came  to  Nargothrond,  which   as  yet              
 none, Orc, Elf, or  Man, had  dared to  plunder, for  dread of              
 the spirit  of  Glomund  and  his very  memory. But  one Mim              
 the Dwarf they found there. This  is the  first coming  of the              
 Dwarves into these tales' of the ancient world; and it is said              
 that  Dwarves  first  spread  west  from  Erydluin,(2) the Blue              
 Mountains,  into  Beleriand  after  the  Battle  of Unnumbered              
 Tears.  Now  Mim  had   found  the   halls  and   treasure  of              
 Nargothrond  unguarded;  and  he  took  possession   of  them,              
 and sat there in joy fingering the gold and gems,  and letting              
 them  run  ever  through  his  hands;  and  he  bound  them to              
 himself  with  many  spells.  But  the folk  of Mim  were few,              
 and  the outlaws  filled with  the lust  of the  treasure slew              


96 

 them, though  Hurin  would  have  stayed  them,  and   at  his              
 death Mim cursed the gold.                                                  
   And  the  curse  came  upon  the  possessors  in  this wise.              

 

 Each  one of  Hurin's company  died or  was slain  in quarrels 
 upon  the road;  but Hurin  went unto  Thingol and  sought his 
 aid, and the folk of Thingol  bore the  treasure to  the Thou- 
 sand  Caves.  Then  Hurin  bade  cast  it all  at the  feet of 
 Thingol, and he reproached  the Elfking  with wild  and bitter 
 words. 'Receive thou,' said he, 'thy fee for thy  fair keeping 
 of my wife and kin.'                                          
   Yet  Thingol  would  not take  the hoard,  and long  he bore 
 with  Hurin;  but  Hurin  scorned him,  and wandered  forth in 
 quest of Morwen his wife,  but it  is not  said that  he found 
 her  ever  upon the  earth; and  some have  said that  he cast 
 himself at last into the western sea, and so ended  the might- 
 iest of the warriors of mortal Men.                           
   Then  the  enchantment  of  the  accursed dragon  gold began 
 to fall even upon the  king of  Doriath, and  long he  sat and 
 gazed upon it, and the seed of the  love of  gold that  was in 
 his  heart  was  waked  to   growth.  Wherefore   he  summoned 
 the greatest of  all craftsmen  that now  were in  the western 
 world,  since  Nargothrond  was  no  more  (and  Gondolin  was 
 not  known),  the Dwarves  of Nogrod  and Belegost,  that they 
 might  fashion  the  gold and  silver and  the gems  (for much 
 was  yet unwrought)  into countless  vessels and  fair things; 
 and  a  marvellous  necklace  of  great  beauty   they  should 
 make, whereon to hang the Silmaril.                           
   But  the  Dwarves  coming  were  stricken  at once  with the 
 lust and desire of the treasure,  and they  plotted treachery. 
 They said  one to  another: 'Is  not this  wealth as  much the 
 right of the Dwarves as  of the  elvish king,  and was  it not 
 wrested  evilly  from  Mim?'  Yet  also  they  lusted  for the 
 Silmaril.                                                     
   And  Thingol,  falling  deeper  into  the  thraldom  of  the 
 spell, for his part scanted his promised reward for  their la- 
 bour;  and  bitter  words  grew  between  them, and  there was 
 battle  in  Thingol's  halls.  There  many  Elves  and Dwarves 
 were slain, and  the howe  wherein they  were laid  in Doriath 
 was  named  Cum-nan-Arasaith,  the   Mound  of   Avarice.  But 
 the remainder  of the  Dwarves were  driven forth  without re- 
 ward or fee.                                                  

 

    Therefore   gathering   new   forces   in   Nogrod   and   in 
  Belegost they returned at  length, and  aided by  the treachery 
  of  certain Elves  on whom  the lust  of the  accursed treasure 
  had fallen they passed into Doriath  secretly. There  they sur- 
  prised  Thingol  upon  a  hunt  with   but  small   company  of 
  arms;  and Thingol  was slain,  and the  fortress of  the Thou- 
  sand  Caves  taken  at  unawares  and  plundered;  and  so  was 
  brought well nigh to  ruin the  glory of  Doriath, and  but one 
  stronghold  of  the  Elves  against  Morgoth now  remained, and 
  their twilight was nigh at hand.                                
    Queen  Melian  the  Dwarves  could  not  seize  or  harm, and 
  she  went  forth  to  seek  Beren and  Luthien. Now  the Dwarf- 
  road  to  Nogrod  and  Belegost  in  the Blue  Mountains passed 
  through  East  Beleriand   and  the   woods  about   the  River 
  Ascar,(3) where   aforetime   were   the  hunting   grounds  of 
  Damrod  and  Diriel,  sons  of  Feanor. To  the south  of those 
  lands  between  the  river and  the mountains  lay the  land of 
  Assariad,  and  there (4) lived  and wandered  still in  peace and 
  bliss  Beren  and  Luthien,  in  that  time  of  respite  which 
  Luthien  had  won,  ere both  should die;  and their  folk were 
  the Green Elves  of the  South, who  were not  of the  Elves of 
  Cor,'  nor of  Doriath, though  many had  fought at  the Battle 
  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  But  Beren  went  no  more to  war, and 
  his land was filled with  loveliness and  a wealth  of flowers; 
  and  while  Beren  was  and  Luthien  remained  Men  called  it 
  oft Cuilwarthien,(6) the Land of the Dead that Live.              


97 

    To  the  north  of  that region  is a  ford across  the river 
  Ascar, near to its joining with Duilwen (7) that falls in torrents 
  from  the  mountains; and  that ford  is named  Sarn-athra,(8) the 
  Ford  of  Stones.  This  ford  the Dwarves  must past  ere they 
  reached their homes," and  there Beren  fought his  last fight, 
  warned  of  their  approach  by  Melian.  In  that  battle  the 
  Green  Elves  took  the  Dwarves  unawares  as  they   were  in 
  the midst of their passage, laden with  their plunder;  and the 
  Dwarvish chiefs were slain, and well nigh  all their  host. But 
  Beren  took  the Nauglafring,  o the  Necklace of  the Dwarves, 
  whereon was hung the  Silmaril; and  it is  said and  sung that 
  Luthien  wearing  that  necklace  and  that  immortal  jewel on 

 

  her white breast was the  vision of  greatest beauty  and glory 
  that  has ever  been seen  outside the  realms of  Valinor, and 
  that for a while the  Land of  the Dead  that Live  became like 
  a  vision of  the land  of the  Gods, and  no places  have been 
  since so fair, so fruitful, or so filled with light.            
    Yet  Melian  warned  them  ever  of the  curse that  lay upon 
  the  treasure  and  upon  the Silmaril.  The treasure  they had 
  drowned  indeed  in  the  river  Ascar,   and  named   it  anew 
  Rathlorion,(11) Golden-Bed,  yet  the  Silmaril   they  retained. 
  And in time the brief  hour of  the loveliness  of the  land of 
  Rathlorion  departed.  For  Luthien  faded  as Mandos  had spo- 
  ken,  even  as  the  Elves  of  later  days  faded,   when  Men 
  waxed  strong  and  usurped  the  goodness  of  the  earth; and 
  she  vanished  from  the  world;  and  Beren  died,   and  none 
  know where their meeting shall be again."                       
    Thereafter  was  Dior  Thingol's  heir,  child  of  Beren and 
  Luthien, king in the woods, most  fair of  all the  children of 
  the  world,  for  his race  was threefold:  of the  fairest and 
  goodliest of Men, and of the Elves, and  of the  spirits divine 
  of Valinor; yet it shielded him not from the  fate of  the oath 
  of  the  sons  of  Feanor. For  Dior went  back to  Doriath and 
  for  a  time  a  part  of  its ancient  glory was  raised anew, 
  though  Melian  no  longer  dwelt  in that  place, and  she de- 
  parted  to  the land  of the  Gods beyond  the western  sea, to 
  muse on her sorrows in the gardens whence she came.             
    But  Dior  wore  the Silmaril  upon his  breast and  the fame 
  of that jewel went  far and  wide; and  the deathless  oath was 
  waked  once  more  from  sleep.  The  sons  of Feanor,  when he 
  would  not  yield  the  jewel  unto them,  came" upon  him with 
  all their host; and so befell the second slaying of Elf by Elf, 
  and  the  most  grievous.  There  fell  Celegorm   and  Curufin 
  and  dark  Cranthir,  but  Dior  was  slain,"  and  Doriath was 
  destroyed and never rose again.                                 
    Yet the sons of Feanor  gained not  the Silmaril;  for faith- 
  ful servants  fled  before  them  and  took  with  them  Elwing 
  the daughter  of  Dior,  and  she escaped,  and they  bore with 
  them the  Nauglafring, and  came in  time to  the mouth  of the 
  river Sirion by the sea.                                        

 

                                     *                                        
                                                                             
  1.   This is the first coming of the Dwarves into these tales > Now for the 
       first time did the Dwarves take part in these tales                     
  2.   Eryd-luin > Ered-luin (late change).                                   
  3.   Ascar > Flend > Gelion at the first two occurrences, but left un-      
       changed at the third.                                                  
  4.   This sentence emended to read: To the south of those lands between     
       the river Flend [> Gelion ] and the mountains lay the land of          
       Ossiriand, watered by seven streams, Flend [> Gelion], Ascar,          
       Thalos, Loeglin [> Legolin ], Brilthor, Duilwen, Adurant. There leved, 
       &c.                                                                    
         (The rivers were first written Flend, Ascar, Thalos, Loeglin,        
       Brilthor, Adurant. Duilwen was then added between Thalos and           
       Loeglin; then Legolin replaced Loeglin and Duilwen was moved to        
       stand between Brilthor and Adurant.)                                   
  5.   Cor > Kor, as previously.                                              


98 

  6.   Men called it oft Cuilwarthien > Elves called it oft Gwenh-i-cuina     
       (see $10 note 15).                                                     
  7.   Duilwen > Ascar (see p. 285, entry Dwarf-road).                        
  8.   Sarn-athra > Sarn-athrad.                                                
  9.   ere they reached their homes > ere they reached the mountain passes 
       that led unto their homes                                              
  10.  Nauglafring > Nauglamir at both occurrences (late changes).             
  11.  Rathlorion > Rathloriel at both occurrences (late changes).            
  12.  Added here:                                                            
                                                                             
          Yet it hath  been sung  that Luthien  alone of  Elves hath  been num- 
          bered  among  our  race,  and  goeth  whither  we go  to a  fate beyond 
          the world.                                                          
                                                                             
        A large pencilled X is made in the margin against the sentence in the 
        typescript  beginning  For  Luthien  faded...;  in  my  father's  manu- 
        scripts this always implies that there  is some  misstatement in  the text 
        that requires revision.                                               
                                                                             
  13.   The words The sons of Feanor, when were struck out, and the sen-      
        tence enlarged thus:                                                  
                                                                             
          For while Luthien wore that peerless gem no Elf would dare assail   
          her, and not even Maidros dared ponder such a thought. But now      
          hearing of the renewal of Doriath and Dior's pride, the seven gath- 
          ered again from wandering; and they sent unto Dior to claim their   
          own. But he would not yield the jewel unto them; and they came,     
          &c.                                                                 
                                                                             
  14.   Added here: and his young sons Eldun and Elrun (late change).         

 

  [For much of this section  there exist  two typescript  texts, the 
  later of the two being longer.  Subsequently there  is a  lot more 
  of such replacement, and I shall call the earlier 'Q I', the later 
  'Q II'. Q II is given after the notes to Q I.]                     
                                                                    
    Here  must  be  told  of  Gondolin.  The  great   river  Sirion, 
  mightiest  in  elvish  song,  flowed  through  all  the   land  of 
  Beleriand  and  its  course  was  south-west;  and  at  its  mouth 
  was  a  great  delta  and  its  lower  course  ran  through  green 
  and fertile lands, little peopled  save by  birds and  beasts. Yet 
  the  Orcs  came  seldom  there,  for  it was  far from  the north- 
  ern  woods  and  fells,  and  the  power  of  Ulmo  waxed  ever in 
  that water, as it drew nigh  to the  sea; for  the mouths  of that 
  river  were  in  the  western  sea,  whose  uttermost  borders are 
  the shores of Valinor.                                             
    Turgon,  Fingolfin's  son,  had  a  sister,  Isfin   the  white- 
  handed.  She  was  lost  in  Taur-na-Fuin  after  the   Battle  of 
  Unnumbered  Tears.  There  she  was   captured  by   the  Dark-elf 
  Eol,  and  it is  said that  he was  of gloomy  mood, and  had de- 
  serted  the  hosts  ere  the  battle;  yet  he  had not  fought on 
  Morgoth's  side.  But Isfin  he took  to wife,  and their  son was 
  Meglin.                                                            
    Now   the   people   of   Turgon   escaping  from   the  battle, 
  aided  by  the  prowess  of  Hurin,  as  has  been  told,  escaped 
  from   the   knowledge   of   Morgoth   and   vanished   from  all 
  men's  eyes;  and  Ulmo   alone  knew   whither  they   had  gone. 
  Their  scouts  climbing  the  heights  had  come  upon   a  secret 
  place  in  the  mountains:  a  broad  valley' entirely  circled by 
  the hills,  ringed  about  it  in  a  fence unbroken,  but falling 
  ever  lower  as  they  came  towards  the  middle.  In   the  mid- 
  most  of  this  marvellous  ring  was  a  wide  land  and  a green 
  plain,  wherein  was  no  hill,  save for  a single  rocky height. 
  This  stood  up  dark  upon the  plain, not  right at  its centre, 
  but nearest  to that  part of  the outer  wall that  marched close 
  to  the  borders  of  Sirion.  Highest  were the  Encircling Moun- 

 

 tains  towards  the  North and  the threat  of Angband,  and on 
 their  outer  slopes  to  East  and North  began the  shadow of 


99 

 dread  Taur-na-Fuin;  but  they  were   crowned  with the cairn 
 of Fingolfin, and no evil came that way, as yet.               
   In this valley the Gnomes  took refuge,'  and spells  of hid- 
 ing  and  enchantment  were set  on all  the hills  about, that 
 foes and  spies might  never find  it. In  this Turgon  had the 
 aid of the messages of Ulmo, that came now up the river        
 Sirion;  for  his  voice  is to  be heard  in many  waters, and 
 some  of  the  Gnomes  had  yet  the lore  to harken.  In those 
 days Ulmo was filled with pity  for the  exiled Elves  in their 
 need,  and  in  the  ruin  that  had  now   almost  overwhelmed 
 them. He foretold that the fortress  of Gondolin  should stand, 
 longest of all the refuges of the Elves against the might of 
 Morgoth,'  and  like  Doriath  never  be  overthrown   save  by 
 treachery  from  within.  Because of  his protecting  might the 
 spells  of concealment  were strongest  in those  parts nearest 
 to  Sirion,  though  there  the  Encircling  Mountains  were at 
 their  lowest.  There  the  Gnomes dug  a great  winding tunnel 
 under the roots of the hills, and  its issue  was in  the steep 
 side, tree-clad  and dark,  of a  gorge through  which Sirion 
 ran,  at  that  point  still  a  young stream  flowing strongly 
 through the  narrow vale  between the  shoulders of  the Encir- 
 cling   Mountains   and   the   Shadowy  Mountains,   in  whose 
 northern heights it took its rise.                             
   The  outer  entrance  of  that  passage,  which they  made at 
 first to be a way of secret issue for themselves and  for their 
 scouts and spies, and for a way  of return  to safety  for fu- 
 gitives, was guarded by their magic and the power of           
 Ulmo,4 and no evil  thing found  it; yet  its inner  gate which 
 looked  upon  the  vale  of  Gondolin  was  guarded unceasingly 
 by the Gnomes.'                                                
   Thorndor King of Eagles removed his eyries from             
 Thangorodrim  to  the  northward  heights  of  the  Encircling: 
 Mountains,  and  there he  kept watch,  sitting upon  the cairn 
 of King Fingolfin. But on the rocky hill amid the vale,        
 Amon  Gwareth,  the  Hill  of  Watch,  whose  sides  they  pol- 

 

   
                                                                 
 ished  to  the  smoothness  of  glass, and  whose top  they lev- 
 elled,  the  Gnomes  built  the  great  city  of  Gondolin  with 
 gates  of  steel,  whose  fame  and  glory  is  greatest  of all 
 dwellings  of  the  Elves  in  the  Outer  Lands. The  plain all 
 about they levelled, that it was as  smooth and  flat as  a lawn 
 of grass  until nigh  unto the  feet of  the hills;  and nothing 
 might walk or creep across unseen.                               
    In  that  city  the  folk  waxed  mighty, and  their amouries 
 were  filled  with  weapons  and  with  shields,  for  they pur- 
 posed  yet to  come forth  to war  when the  hour was  ripe. But 
 as  the years  drew on  they grew  to love  that place,  and de- 
 sired  no better.  and few  ever issued  forth,(6) they  shut them 
 behind  their  impenetrable  and  enchanted hills,  and suffered 
 ' none to enter, fugitive or foe, and tidings of the outer world 
 came but faint and far, and  they heeded  them little,  and for- 
 got   the   messages   of  Ulmo.   They  succoured   not  Nargo- 
 thrond  or  Doriath,  and  the  wandering  Elves  knew  not  how 
 to  find  them;  and  when  Turgon  learned  of  the  slaying of 
 Dior,  he  vowed  never  to  march  with  any  son   of  Feanor, 
 and closed  his realm,  forbidding any  of his  folk to  go ever 
 forth.'                                                          
    Gondolin  now  alone  remained  of  all  the  strongholds  of 
 the  Elves.  Morgoth  forgot  not  Turgon,  and knew  that with- 
 out  knowledge   of  that   king  his   triumph  could   not  be 
 achieved;  yet  his  search  unceasing   was  in   vain.  Nargo- 
 thrond  was  void,   Doriath  desolate,   the  sons   of  Feanor 
 driven  away  to a  wild woodland  life in  the South  and East, 
 Hithlum  was  filled  with  evil  men,  and  Taurna-Fuin  was  a 
 place  of  nameless  dread;  the race  of Hador  was at  an end, 
 and  the  house  of  Finrod;  Beren  came  no  more to  war, and 
 Huan  was  slain;  and  all  Elves  and Men  bowed to  his will, 


100 

 or  laboured  as  slaves  in  the  mines  and  smithies  of Ang- 
 band,  save  only  the  wild  and   wandering,  and   few  there 
 Were  of  these save  far in  the East  of once  fair Beleriand. 
 His  triumph was  near complete,  and yet  was not  quite full.(8) 
                                                                 
                                *                                 

 

                                                                            
                                                                              
  1. This sentence was rewritten thus:                                          
                                                                              
       Ulmo  alone  knew  whither  they had  gone; for  they returned  to the 
       hidden city of Gondolin that Turgon had  built. In  a secret  place in 
       the mountains there was a broad valley, &c.                             
                                                                              
  2. the Gnomes took refuge > Turgon had taken refuge                        
  3. At this point the replacement text Q II begins.                            
  4. the power of Ulmo > the power of Sirion beloved of Ulmo                 
  5. The  following  passage was  added in  pencil in  the margin  without di- 
     rection for insertion. For its place in Q II, where it is embodied in the 
     text, see below.                                                          
                                                                              
       For   Turgon   deemed   after   the   Battle   of   Unnumbered   Tears  that 
       Morgoth  had  grown  too  mighty  for  Elves  and  Men,  and  that  it  were 
       better  to  ask  the  forgiveness and  aid of  the Valar  ere all  was lost. 
       Wherefore  some  of  his  folk  would  at  whiles  go  down  Sirion,  and  a 
       small  and  secret  haven  they  there  made,  whence  ever  and  anon ships 
       would  set  forth  into  the  West.  Some  came  back  driven   by  contrary 
       winds, but many never returned; and none reached Valinor.               
                                                                              
  6. Added here: and they sent no more messengers into the West;                
  7. Here the replacement text Q II ends.                                       
  8. Added at the end: In this wise came the fall of Gondolin.                  
                                                                              
                            $15 in the Q II version                            
                              (see note 3 above).                              
                                                                              
  and  like  Doriath  never  be  overthrown save  by treachery                 
  from within. Because of his protecting might the  spells of"                 
  concealment were strongest in those parts nearest to Sirion,                 
  though there the Encircling Mountains were at their lowest.:                 
  In that region the Gnomes dug a  great winding  tunnel under                 
  the roots of the hills, and its issue was in the steep side,                 
  tree-clad and dark, of  a gorge  through which  the blissful                 
  river ran. There he was  still a  young stream,  but strong,                 
  flowing down the narrow  vale that  lies between  the shoul-                 
  ders of the Encircling Mountains and the Mountains of                        
  Shadow,  Eryd-Lomin,(1) the  walls   of  Hithlum,   in  whose                 
  northern heights he took his rise.(2)                                         
    That passage they made at first to be a way of  return for                 
  fugitives and for such as escaped from the bondage of                        
  Morgoth; and most as an issue for  their scouts  and messen-                 

 

  gers.  For  Turgon  deemed,  when first  they came  into that 
  yale  after the  dreadful battle,'  that Morgoth  Bauglir had 
  grown too mighty for  Elves and  Men, and  that it  were bet- 
  ter to seek the forgiveness and aid of  the Valar,  if either 
  might be got, ere all was  lost. Wherefore  some of  his folk 
  went  down  the  river Sirion  at whiles,  ere the  shadow of 
  Morgoth yet stretched into the uttermost parts  of Beleriand, 
  and  a  small  and  secret  haven  they  made  at  his mouth; 
  thence  ever and  anon ships  would set  forth into  the West 
  bearing  the  embassy of  the Gnomish  king. Some  there were 
  that  came  back  driven  by  contrary  winds;  but  the most 
  never returned again, and none reached Valinor.               
    The  issue  of  that  Way  of Escape  was guarded  and con- 
  cealed by the mightiest  spells they  could contrive,  and by 
  the  power  that  dwelt  in  Sirion beloved  of Ulmo,  and no 
  thing of evil found it; yet its inner gate, which looked upon 


101 

  the  vale  of  Gondolin,  was  watched  unceasingly   by  the 
  Gnomes.                                                       
    In  those  days Thorndor'  King of  Eagles removed  his ey- 
  ries  from  Thangorodrim,  because of  the power  of Morgoth, 
  and the stench and  fumes, and  the evil  of the  dark clouds 
  that lay  now ever  upon the  mountain-towers above  his cav- 
  ernous  halls.   But  Thorndor   dwelt  upon   the  northward 
  heights of the Encircling  Mountains, and  he kept  watch and 
  saw many things, sitting  upon the  cairn of  King Fingolfin. 
  And  in  the vale  below dwelt  Turgon Fingolfin's  son. Upon 
  Amon  Gwareth,  the  Hill  of   Defence,  the   rocky  height 
  amidst the plain, was  built Gondolin  the great,  whose fame 
  and glory is mightiest in song of all  dwellings of  the Elves 
  these  Outer Lands.  Of steel  were its  gates and  of marble 
  were its walls. The sides of the hill the Gnomes  polished to 
  the smoothness of dark glass,  and its  top they  levelled for 
  the building  of their  town, save  amidmost where  stood the 
  tower and palace of the  king. Many  fountains there  were in 
  that city,  and white  waters fell  shimmering down  the glis- 
  tening  sides  of  Amon  Gwareth.  The  plain all  about they 
  smoothed till it became as a  lawn of  shaven grass  from the 

 

 stairways  before  the  gates  unto  the  feet of  the mountain        
 wall, and nought might walk or creep across unseen.                    
   In  that  city  the  folk waxed  mighty, and  their armouries        
 were  filled  with  weapons  and  with  shields; for  they pur-        
 posed at first to come forth to  war, when  the hour  was ripe.        
 But as the years drew  on, they  grew to  love that  place, the        
 work  of  their hands,  as the  Gnomes do,  with a  great love,        
 and  desired  no  better.  Then  seldom  went  any  forth  from        
 Gondolin  on  errand  of  war  or  peace  again.  They  sent no        
 messengers  more  into  the  West,   and  Sirion's   haven  was        
 desolate.  They  shut  them behind  their impenetrable  and en-        
 chanted  hills,  and  suffered  none to  enter, though  he fled        
 from  Morgoth  hate-pursued;  tidings  of  the   lands  without        
 came to them faint and far,  and they  heeded them  little; and        
 their  dwelling  became  as  a  rumour,  and  a  secret  no man        
 could  find.  They  succoured  not  Nargothrond   nor  Doriath,        
 and  the  wandering  Elves  sought  them  in  vain;   and  Ulmo        
 alone  knew  where  the realm  of Turgon  could be  found. Tid-        
 ings  Turgon  heard  of  Thorndor  concerning  the  slaying  of        
 Dior, Thingol's heir, and thereafter  he shut  his ear  to word        
 of  the  woes  without;  and  he  vowed to  march never  at the        
 side of any  son of  Feanor; and  his folk  he forbade  ever to        
 pass the leaguer of the hills.                                         
                                                                       
                      Changes made to this passage.                     
                                                                       
 1. Eryd-Lomin > Eredwethion                                             
 2. in whose northern heights he took his rise struck through.           
 3. This sentence marked with an X in the margin.                        
 4. Thorndor >  Thorondor throughout.                                   
                                                                       
                                   16.                                  
                                                                       
 [A  substantial  part  of  this  section  is again  extant both  in the 
 original typescript (Q I) and in a replacement text (Q II).]           
                                                                       
   On a time Eol was lost in Taur-na-Fuin, and Isfin came               
 through great peril and dread unto Gondolin, and after her             
 coming  none  entered  until  the  last  messenger of  Ulmo, of        

 

 whom  the  tales speak  more ere  the end.  With her  came her 
 son  Meglin, and  he was  there received  by Turgon  his moth- 
 er's brother,(1) and though  he was  half of  Dark-elfin' blood 
 he was treated as a prince of Fingolfin's  line. He  was swart 
 but  comely,  wise  and  eloquent,  and  cunning to  win men's 
 hearts and minds.                                             
   Now  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor.  The  son of 


102 

 Huor   was  Tuor.   Rian  Huor's   wife  sought   her  husband 
 among  the  slain  upon  the  field  of Unnumbered  Tears, and 
 there bewailed him, ere  she died.  Her son  was but  a child, 
 and remaining in Hithlum fell into the hands of  the faithless 
 Men  whom  Morgoth  drove  into  that  land after  the battle; 
 and he became a thrall.  Growing of  age, and  he was  fair of 
 face and great of stature, and despite his grievous  life val- 
 iant and wise, he  escaped into  the woods,  and he  became an 
 outlaw  and  a  solitary,  living  alone  and  communing  with 
 none save rarely wandering and hidden Elves.(3)'                 
   On a time  Ulmo contrived,  as is  told in  the Tale  of the 
 Fall  of Gondolin,  that he  should be  led to  a river-course 
 that  flowed  underground from  Lake Mithrim  in the  midst of 
 Hithlum into a great  chasm, Cris-Ilfing,(4) the Rainbow-cleft, 
 through which a turbulent water ran at  last into  the western 
 sea.  And  the name  of this  chasm was  so devised  by reason 
 of the rainbow that shimmered ever in the  sun in  that place, 
 because of the abundance of the  spray of  the rapids  and the 
 waterfalls.                                                   
   In this way  the flight  of Tuor  was marked  by no  Man nor 
 Elf;  neither  was  it  known  to  the  Orcs  or  any  spy  of 
 Morgoth, with whom the land of Hithlum was filled.            
   Tuor  wandered  long  by  the  western   shores,  journeying 
 ever South; and he came at last to the  mouths of  Sirion, and 
 the sandy deltas peopled  by many  birds of  the sea.  There he 
 fell  in  with  a  Gnome,  Bronweg,'  who  had   escaped  from 
 Angband,  and being  of old  of the  people of  Turgon, sought 
 ever to find the path  to the  hidden places  of his  lord, of 
 which  rumour  ran  among  all  captives  and  fugitives.  Now 
 Bronweg  had  come  thither  by  far  and  wandering  paths to 
 the East, and little though any step back nigher to  the thral- 

 

 dom from which he had come was to his liking, he pur-        
 posed now to go up Sirion and seek for Turgon in             
 Beleriand. Fearful and very wary was he, and he aided Tuor 
 in their secret march, by night and twilight, so that they 
 were not discovered by the Orcs.                             
   They came first into the fair Land of Willows, Nan-        
 Tathrin which is watered by the Narog and by Sirion; and 
 there all things were yet green, and the meads were rich 
 and full of flowers, and there was song of many birds; so 
 that Tuor lingered there as one enchanted, and it seemed 
 sweet to him to dwell there after the grim lands of the      
 North and his weary wandering.                               
   There Ulmo came and appeared before him, as he stood       
 in the long grass at evening; and the might and majesty of 
 that vision is told of in the song of Tuor that he made for 
 his son Earendel. Thereafter. the sound of the sea and the 
 longing for the sea was ever in Tuor's heart and ear; and an 
 unquiet was on him at whiles that took him at last into the 
 depths of the realm of Ulmo.' But now Ulmo bade him          
 make all speed to Gondolin, and gave him guidance for the 
 finding of the hidden door; and words were set in his        
 mouth to bear to Turgon, bidding him prepare for battle      
 with Morgoth ere all was lost, and promising that Ulmo       
 would win the hearts of the Valar to send him succour. That 
 would be a mortal and a terrible strife, yet if Turgon would 
 dare it, Morgoth's power should be broken and his servants 
 perish and never after trouble the world. But if Turgon      
 would not go forth to this war, then he must abandon         
 Gondolin and lead his people down Sirion, ere Morgoth        
 could oppose him, and at Sirion's mouth Ulmo would be-       
 friend him, and lend his aid to the building of a mighty     
 fleet wherein the Gnomes should sail back at last to         
 Valinor, but then grievous would be the fate of the Outer 
 Lands. Tuor's part if Turgon should accept the counsels of 
 Ulmo, would be to go forth when Turgon marched to war        
 and lead a force into Hithlum and draw its Men once more, 
 into alliance with the Elves, for 'without Men the Elves 


103 

 shall not prevail against the Orcs and Balrogs'.             

 

 This  errand  did  Ulmo  himself  perform out  of his  love of 
 Elves  and  of  the  Gnomes,  and  because  he  knew  that ere 
 twelve  years  were   passed  the   doom  of   Gondolin  would 
 come, strong though it seemed, if its people sat  still behind 
 their walls.                                                  
    Obedient  to  Ulmo  Tuor   and  Bronweg   journeyed  North, 
 and  came  to  the hidden  door; and  passing down  the tunnel 
 neath the hills they came to  the inner  gate and  looked upon 
 the  vale  of  Gondolin,  the  city  of  seven  names, shining 
 white  flushed  with  the  rose  of dawn  upon the  plain. But 
 there they  were made  captive by  the guard  of the  gate and 
 led  before  the  king. Tuor  spoke his  embassy to  Turgon in 
 the great square of Gondolin before the  steps of  his palace; 
 but  the  king  was  grown  proud  and  Gondolin  so  fair and 
 beautiful and he was so trustful of  its secret  and impregna- 
 ble  strength,  that he  and the  most of  his folk  wished no 
 longer  to  trouble  with  the  Gnomes  and  Men  without, nor 
 did they long more to return to the lands of the Gods.        
    Meglin  spake  against Tuor  in the  councils of  the king, 
 and Turgon  rejected the  bidding of  Ulmo, and  neither did 
 he go forth to war nor seek to  fly to  the mouths  of Sirion; 
 but  there  were  some  of  his  wiser  counsellors  who  were 
 filled with disquiet, and the king's  daughter spake  ever for 
 Tuor. She was named Idril, one of the  fairest of  the maidens 
 of the Elves of old, and folk called her  Celebrindal, Silver- 
 foot, for the whiteness of  her slender  feet, and  she walked 
 and danced ever unshod.                                       
    Thereafter  Tuor   sojourned  in   Gondolin,  and   grew  a 
 mighty  man  in  form and  in wisdom,  learning deeply  of the 
 lore  of  the Gnomes;  and the  heart of  Idril was  turned to 
 him, and his to  hei. At  which Meglin  ground his  teeth, for 
 he  loved  Idril, and  despite his  close kinship  purposed to 
 Wed  her;  indeed  already  he  was planning  in his  heart to 
 oust  Turgon and  to seize  the throne,  but Turgon  loved and 
 trusted  him.  Tuor  wedded  Idril nonetheless,  for he  had be- 
 come  beloved  by  all  the  Gnomes  of Gondolin,  even Turgon 
 the proud,  save only  Meglin and  his secret  following. Tuor 
 and  Beren  alone  of  mortal  Men ever  wedded Elves  of old, 

 

  and  since Elwing  daughter of  Dior son  of Beren  after wed- 
  ded Earendel son of  Tuor and  Idril, of  them alone  has come 
  the  elfin  blood  into mortal  Men. But  yet Earendel  was an 
  infant; and he was a child surpassing fair: a light was in his 
  face  as  of  heaven,  and he  had the  beauty and  the wisdom 
  of Elfinesse (7) and  the strength  and hardihood  of the  Men of 
  old; and the  sea spoke  ever in  his ear  and heart,  even as 
  with Tuor his father.                                          
    On  a  time when  Earendel was  yet young,  and the  days of 
  Gondolin were full  of joy  and peace  (and yet  Idril's heart 
  misgave  her,  and foreboding  crept upon  her spirit  like a 
  cloud),  Meglin  was  lost.  Now   Meglin  loved   mining  and 
  quarrying after metals above  other craft;  and he  was master 
  and  leader  of  the  Gnomes  who  worked  in   the  mountains 
  distant from the city, seeking for metals for  their smithying 
  of  things  both  of  peace  and  war.  But often  Meglin went 
  with few of his folk beyond the leaguer  of the  hills, though 
  the  king  knew not  that his  bidding was  defied; and  so it 
  came to pass, as fate willed, that  Meglin was  taken prisoner 
  by  the  Orcs  and  taken  before   Morgoth.  Meglin   was  no 
  weakling  or  craven,  but  the   torment  wherewith   he  was 
  threatened  cowed  his  soul,  and he  purchased his  life and 
  freedom  by  revealing  unto  Morgoth  the  place  of Gondolin 
  and the ways  whereby it  might be  found and  assailed. Great 
  indeed  was  the  joy of  Morgoth; and  to Meglin  he promised 
  the lordship of Gondolin,  as his  vassal, and  the possession 
  of Idril, when that city should be taken.  Lust for  Idril and 
  hatred of Tuor  led Meglin  the easier  to his  foul treachery. 


104 

  But  Morgoth  sent  him  back  to  Gondolin,  lest  men should 
  suspect the betrayal, and so  that Meglin  should aid  the as- 
  sault  from  within  when  the  hour  came;  and  Meglin abode 
  in the halls of the king with a smile on his face and  evil in 
  his heart, while the gloom gathered ever deeper upon Idril- 
    At  last,  and  Earendel  was  then  seven  years   of  age, 
  Morgoth  was  ready,  and  he  loosed  upon Gondolin  his Orcs 
  and his Balrogs  and his  serpents; and  of these,  dragons of 
  many  and  dire  shapes  were  now devised  for the  taking of 
  the city. The  host of  Morgoth came  over the  Northern hills 

 

 where the  height was  greatest and  the watch  less vigilant, 
 and it came at night at a time of festival, when all  the folk 
 of  Gondolin  were  upon  the  walls to  wait upon  the rising 
 sun and sing their songs at its uplifting; for the  morrow was 
 the  feast  which  they  named  the Gates  of Summer.  But the 
 red light mounted the hills in the North and not in  the East; 
 and there was no stay  in the  advance of  the foe  until they 
 were  beneath  the  very  walls  of  Gondolin,   and  Gondolin 
 was beleaguered without hope.                                 
   Of the deeds of desperate valour there  done, by  the chief- 
 tains of the noble houses  and their  warriors, and  not least 
 by Tuor, is much told in The  Fall of  Gondolin; of  the death 
 of Rog without the walls; and  of the  battle of  Ecthelion of 
 the  Fountain  with  Gothmog  lord  of  Balrogs  in  the  very 
 square of  the king,  where each  slew the  other; and  of the 
 defence  of  the  tower  of Turgon  by the  men of  his house- 
 hold,  until  the  tower  was overthrown;  and mighty  was its 
 fall and the fall of Turgon in its ruin.                      
   Tuor sought to rescue Idril from the sack  of the  city, but 
 Meglin  had  laid  hands  upon  her  and  Earendel;  and  Tuor 
 fought on  the walls  with him,  and cast  him down  to death. 
 Then  Tuor  and  Idril  led  such  remnants  of  the  folk  of 
 Gondolin as they could gather  in the  confusion of  the burn- 
 ing down a secret way that Idril had let  prepare in  the days 
 of her foreboding. This was  not yet  complete, but  its issue 
 was  already  far beyond  the walls  and in  the North  of the 
 plain  where  the  mountains  were  long  distant   from  Amon 
 Gwareth.  Those  who  would  not  come  with  them,  but  fled 
 to the old Way of Escape that  led into  the gorge  of Sirion, 
 were  caught  and  destroyed  by  a  dragon  that  Morgoth had 
 sent to watch that gate, being apprised of  it by  Meglin. But 
 of  the  new  passage  Meglin had  not heard,  and it  was not 
 thought that  fugitives would  take a  path towards  the North 
 and  the highest  parts of  the mountains  and the  nighest to 
 Angband.                                                      
   The fume of the  burning, and  the steam  of the  fair foun- 
 tains of Gondolin  withering in  the flame  of the  dragons of 
 the North,  fell  upon the  vale in  mournful mists;  and thus 

 

  
                                                                
 was  the  escape  of  Tuor  and  his  company  aided,  for then 
 was still  a long  and open  road to  follow from  the tunnel's 
 mouth  to  the  foothills  of  the  mountains. They  came none- 
 theless  into the  mountains, in  woe and  misery, for  the high 
 places  were  cold  and  terrible,  and  they  had  among  them 
 many women and children and many wounded men.                   
   There  is  a  dreadful  pass,  Cristhorn (8) was it  named, the 
 Eagle's  Cleft,  where  beneath  the  shadow  of   the  highest 
 peaks a narrow path  winds its  way, walled  by a  precipice to 
 the right and on the left a dreadful fall leaps into emptiness. 
 Along  that  narrow  way their  march was  strung, when  it was 
 ambushed  by  an  outpost  of  Morgoth's  power;  and  a Balrog 
 was their leader. Then  dreadful was  their plight,  and hardly 
 would it have  been saved  by the  deathless valour  of yellow- 
 haired  Glorfindel,  chief of  the House  of the  Golden Flower 
 of Gondolin, had not Thorndor' come timely to their aid.        
   Songs  have  been  sung of  the duel  of Glorfindel  with the 


105 

 Balrog upon a pinnacle  of rock  in that  high place;  and both 
 fell to ruin in the  abyss. But  Thorndor bore  up Glorfindel's 
 body  and  he  was  buried  in  a  mound  of stones  beside the 
 pass, and there came after a  turf of  green and  small flowers 
 like  yellow  stars  bloomed  there  amid  the   barrenness  of 
 stone.  And  the  birds  of  Thorndor  stooped  upon  the  Orcs 
 and  drove  them  shrieking back;  and all  were slain  or cast 
 into  the  deeps,  and  rumour  of  the  escape  from  Gondolin 
 came not until long after to Morgoth's ears.                    
   Thus  by  weary   and  dangerous   marches  the   remnant  of 
 Gondolin  came  unto  Nan-Tathrin  and  there  rested  a while, 
 and were healed of their  hurts and  weariness, but  their sor- 
 row  could  not  be  cured.  There  they  made feast  in memory 
 of  Gondolin  and  those  that  had  perished,   fair  maidens, 
 wives,  and  warriors and  their king;  but for  Glorfindel the 
 well-beloved  many  and   sweet  were   the  songs   they  sang 
 And  there  Tuor  in  song  spoke  to  Earendel  his  son  of the 
 coming  of  Ulmo  aforetime,  the  sea-vision  in the  midst of 
 the land,  and the  sea-longing awoke  in his  heart and  in his 
 son's.  Wherefore  they  removed  with  the  most  part  of the 
 people  to  the mouths  of Sirion  by the  sea, and  there they 

 

 dwelt,  and  joined  their  folk  to  the slender  company of                  
 Elwing daughter of Dior, that had  fled thither  little while                  
 before.                                                                        
   Then  Morgoth  thought in  his heart  that his  triumph was                  
 fulfilled, recking little of the sons of Feanor, and of their                  
 oath, which had  harmed him  never and  turned always  to his                  
 mightiest aid. And in his black  thought he  laughed, regret-                  
 ting not the one Silmaril he had  lost, for  by it  he deemed                  
 the last shreds of the elvish race should vanish yet from the                  
 earth and trouble it no more. If he knew  of the  dwelling by                  
 the waters of Sirion  he made  no sign,  biding his time, and                  
 waiting upon the working of oath and lie.                                      
                                                                               
                                       *                                        
                                                                               
      1. mother's brother > sister-son; no doubt as his sister-son was intended. 
      2. Dark-elfin > Dark-elven                                                 
 3. This  paragraph  was  largely  struck out,  as well  as some  hasty emenda- 
      tions that had  been made  to it  (introducing the  idea of  Tuor's being 
      born 'in the wild' and fostered by  Dark-elves, and  Rian's dying  on the 
      Hill  of  Slain  - which  is here  called Amon  Dengin). The  passage was 
      then rewritten:                                                           
                                                                               
        Now  Hurin  of  Hithlum  had  a  brother  Huor, and  as has  been told 
        Rian his wife went  forth into  the wild  and there  her son  Tuor was 
        born, and he was  fostered by  the Dark-elves;  but Rian  laid herself 
        down  and  died  upon  the  Hill  of Slain.  But Tuor  grew up  in the 
        woods of Hithlum, and he was  fair of  face and  great of stature, and 
        valiant and wise; and he  walked and  hunted alone  in the  woods, and 
        he  became  a  solitary,  living  alone and  communing with  none save 
        rarely wandering and hidden Elves.                                      
                                                                               
 4. Cris-Ilfing > Kirith Helvin                                             
 5. Bronweg > Bronwe at the first two occurrences, but not at the third,         
      which occurs in the part replaced by the Q II text.                       
 6. At this point the replacement text Q II begins.                              
 7. Here the replacement text Q II ends.                                         
 8. Cristhorn > Kirith-thoronath                                                 
 9. Thorndor > Thorondor, as previously.                                         

 

                     $16 in the Q II version                     
                        (see note 6 above).                      
                                                                
 But  now  Ulmo  bade  him  make  all  speed  to   Gondolin,  and 
 gave  him  guidance  for  the  finding of  the hidden  door; and 
 a  message  he  gave  him to  bear from  Ulmo, friend  of Elves, 
 unto Turgon, bidding  him to  prepare for  war, and  battle with 


106 

 Morgoth  ere  all  was lost;  and to  send again  his messengers 
 into  the  West.  Summons  too  should  he  send  into  the East 
 and  gather,  if  he  might,  Men  (who  were   now  multiplying 
 and  spreading  on  the earth)  unto his  banners; and  for that 
 task  Tuor  was  most  fit.  'Forget,'  counselled   Ulmo,  'the 
 treachery  of  Uldor  the  accursed,  and  remember  Hurin;  far 
 without  mortal  Men  the  Elves shall  not prevail  against the 
 Balrogs and  the Orcs.'  Nor should  the feud  with the  sons of 
 Feanor be left unhealed; for this should  be the  last gathering 
 of  the  hope  of  the  Gnomes,  when  every sword  should count. 
 A terrible and mortal strife he foretold, but victory  if Turgon 
 would  dare  it,  the  breaking  of  Morgoth's  power,  and  the 
 healing  of  feuds,  and  friendship  between  Men   and  Elves, 
 whereof  the  greatest  good  should  come  into the  world, and 
 the  servants  of  Morgoth  trouble  it no  more. But  if Turgon 
 would  not  go  forth  to  this  war,  then  he  should  abandon 
 Gondolin  and  lead  his  people  down  Sirion,  and  build thee 
 his  fleets  and  seek  back  to  Valinor and  the mercy  of the 
 Gods.  But  in  this  counsel  there was  danger more  dire than 
 in  the  other,  though  so  it  might  not  seem;  and grievous 
 thereafter would be the fate of the Outer' Lands.               
  This  errand  Ulmo  performed  out  of his  love of  the Elves, 
 and  because  he  knew  that  ere  many  years  were  passed the 
 doom  of Gondolin  would come,  if its  people sat  still behind 
 its walls;  not thus  should anything  of joy  or beauty  in the 
 world be preserved from Morgoth's malice.                       
  Obedient   to   Ulmo   Tuor   and   Bronweg'   journeyed   North, 
 and  came  at  last  to the  hidden door;  and passing  down the 
 tunnel  reached  the  inner  gate,  and  were  taken by  the guard 
 as prisoners. There they saw the fair  vale Tumladin (3) set like 
 a  green  jewel  amid  the  hills;  and amidst  Tumladin Gondolin 

 

  the great, the city of seven names,  white, shining  from afar, 
  flushed  with the  rose of  dawn upon  the plain.  Thither they 
  were led and passed the gates  of steel,  and were  brought be- 
  fore the steps of the palace of the king. There Tuor  spake the 
  embassy  of  Ulmo, and  something of  the power  and majesty 
  of the Lord of Waters his voice had caught, so that  all folk 
 looked in wonder on  him, and  doubted that  this were  a Man 
 of  mortal  race  as  he  declared.  But  proud was  Turgon be- 
 come,  and  Gondolin  as  beautiful  as  a  memory of  Tun, and 
 he trusted in its secret and impregnable  strength; so  that he 
 and the most  part of  his folk  wished not  to imperil  it nor 
 leave it, and they desired not to mingle in  the woes  of Elves 
 and  Men  without;  nor did  they any  longer desire  to return 
 through dread and danger to the West.                           
    Meglin  spoke  ever  against  Tuor  in  the councils  of the 
 king,  and  his  words  seemed  the more  weighty in  that they 
 went  with  Turgon's  heart.  Wherefore  Turgon   rejected  the 
 bidding  of  Ulmo;  though  some  there  were  of   his  wisest 
 counsellors  who  were   filled  with   disquiet.  Wise-hearted 
 even  beyond  the  measure  of the  daughters of  Elfinesse was 
 the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  she  spoke  ever  for Tuor, 
 though it did not  avail, and  her heart  was heavy.  Very fair 
 and tall was she, well nigh of warrior's stature, and  her hair 
 was  a  fountain  of  gold.  Idril  was  she named,  and called 
 Celebrindal, Silver-foot, for  the whiteness  of her  foot; and 
 she  walked  and  danced  ever  unshod  in  the white  ways and 
 green lawns of Gondolin.                                        
    Thereafter  Tuor  sojourned  in  Gondolin,  and went  not to 
 summon  the  Men  of  the  East,  for  the  blissfulness  of 
 Gondolin,  the  beauty  and wisdom  of its  folk, held  him en- 
 thralled. And he grew high in the favour of Turgon; for he 
 became a mighty man in stature and in mind, learning       
 deeply of the lore of the Gnomes. The heart of Idril was 
 turned to him, and his to her; at which Meglin ground his 
 teeth, for he desired Idril, and despite his close kinship pur- 
 posed to possess her; and she was the only heir of the king 
 of Gondolin. Indeed in his heart he was already planning 


107 

 how he might oust Turgon and seize his throne; but Turgon 

 

  the great, the city of seven names,  white, shining  from afar, 
  flushed  with the  rose of  dawn upon  the plain.  Thither they 
  were led and passed the gates  of steel,  and were  brought be- 
  fore the steps of the palace of the king. There Tuor  spake the 
  embassy  of  Ulmo, and  something of  the power  and majesty 
  of the Lord of Waters his voice had caught, so that  all folk 
 looked in wonder on  him, and  doubted that  this were  a Man 
 of  mortal  race  as  he  declared.  But  proud was  Turgon be- 
 come,  and  Gondolin  as  beautiful  as  a  memory of  Tun, and 
 he trusted in its secret and impregnable  strength; so  that he 
 and the most  part of  his folk  wished not  to imperil  it nor 
 leave it, and they desired not to mingle in  the woes  of Elves 
 and  Men  without;  nor did  they any  longer desire  to return 
 through dread and danger to the West.                           
    Meglin  spoke  ever  against  Tuor  in  the councils  of the 
 king,  and  his  words  seemed  the more  weighty in  that they 
 went  with  Turgon's  heart.  Wherefore  Turgon   rejected  the 
 bidding  of  Ulmo;  though  some  there  were  of   his  wisest 
 counsellors  who  were   filled  with   disquiet.  Wise-hearted 
 even  beyond  the  measure  of the  daughters of  Elfinesse was 
 the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  she  spoke  ever  for Tuor, 
 though it did not  avail, and  her heart  was heavy.  Very fair 
 and tall was she, well nigh of warrior's stature, and  her hair 
 was  a  fountain  of  gold.  Idril  was  she named,  and called 
 Celebrindal, Silver-foot, for  the whiteness  of her  foot; and 
 she  walked  and  danced  ever  unshod  in  the white  ways and 
 green lawns of Gondolin.                                        
    Thereafter  Tuor  sojourned  in  Gondolin,  and went  not to 
 summon  the  Men  of  the  East,  for  the  blissfulness  of 
 Gondolin,  the  beauty  and wisdom  of its  folk, held  him en- 
 thralled. And he grew high in the favour of Turgon; for he 
 became a mighty man in stature and in mind, learning       
 deeply of the lore of the Gnomes. The heart of Idril was 
 turned to him, and his to her; at which Meglin ground his 
 teeth, for he desired Idril, and despite his close kinship pur- 
 posed to possess her; and she was the only heir of the king 
 of Gondolin. Indeed in his heart he was already planning 
 how he might oust Turgon and seize his throne; but Turgon 

 

 loved  and  trusted  him.  Nonetheless  Tuor   took  Idril  to wife; 
 and  the  folk  of  Gondolin   made  merry   feast,  for   Tuor had 
 won  their  hearts,  all  save  Meglin  and his  secret following, 
 Tuor  and  Beren  alone  of  mortal  Men  had  Elves  to  wife, and 
 since  Elwing  daughter  of  Dior  son   of  Beren   after  wedded 
 Earendel  son  of  Tuor  and  Idril  of  Gondolin,  of  them alone 
 has  come  the  elfin4  blood   into  mortal   race.  But  as yet 
 Earendel  was  a  little  child:  surpassing  fair  was he, a light 
 was  in  his  face  as  the  light  of  heaven,  and  he   had the 
 beauty and the wisdom of Elfinesse.                               
                                                                  
                    Changes made to this passage                   
                                                                  
 1. Outer > Hither                                                  
 2. Bronweg > Bronwe (see note 5 above).                            
 3. Tumladin > Tumladen                                             
 4. elfin > elven                                                    
                                                                  
                                 17.                               
                                                                  
  [The whole of this section is extant in the two typescript ver- 
 sions Q I and Q II.]                                              
                                                                  
   Yet  by  Sirion  there  grew  up  an  elfin  folk,  the gleanings 
 of  Doriath  and  Gondolin,  and  they  took  to  the  sea  and  I 
 the  making  of  fair  ships,   and  they   dwelt  nigh   unto its 
 shores and under the shadow of Ulmo's hand.                       
   But  in  Valinor  Ulmo  spake  grievous  words  unto  the  Valar 


108 

 and  unto  the  Elves  the  kinsfolk  of  the  exiled  and  ruined 
 Gnomes,  and  he  called  on  them  to   forgive,  and   to  rescue 
 the   world   from   the   overmastering   might  of   Morgoth, and 
 win   back   the   Silmarils  wherein   alone  now   bloomed  the 
 light  of  the  days  of  ancient  bliss  when  the Two  Trees st(R) 
 shone. And the sons of the Valar prepared for battle,             
 Fionwe  son  of  Tulcas  was  the  captain of  the host.  With hi(R) 
 marched the host of the Quendi, the Light-elves, the folk         
 Ingwe,   and  among   them  such   of  the   race  of   the  Gnomes 
 [as]  had  not  left  Valinor;  but   remembering  Swan   Haven the 
 Teleri  came  not  forth.  Tun  was  deserted  and  the hill  of Cor 
 knew  no  more  the  feet  of  the  elder  children  of  the world. 

 

   In those  days Tuor  felt old  age creep  upon him,  and he 
 could  not  forbear the  longing that  possessed him  for the 
 sea; wherefore he built a great ship Earame,  Eagle's Pinion, 
 and with Idril he set sail into the sunset and the  West, and 
 came  no more  into any  tale. But  Earendel the  shining be- 
 came the lord of the  folk of  Sirion and  took to  wife fair 
 Elwing; and yet he could not rest. Two  thoughts were  in his 
 heart blended as one: the longing  for the  wide sea;  and he 
 thought  to  sail  thereon  following  after  Tuor  and Idril 
 Celebrindal who  returned not,  and he  thought to  find per- 
 haps the last shore and bring ere  he died  a message  to the 
 Gods and Elves  of the  West, that  should move  their hearts 
 to pity on the world and the sorrows of Mankind.             
   Wingelot he built, fairest of the ships of song,  the Foam- 
 flower; white  were its  timbers as  the argent  moon, golden 
 were  its  oars,  silver  were  its  shrouds, its  masts were 
 crowned with jewels  like stars.  In the  Lay of  Earendel is 
 many  a  thing  sung  of his  adventures in  the deep  and in 
 lands untrod, and in many seas  and many  isles; and  most of 
 how  he  fought  and  slew  Ungoliant  in  the South  and her 
 darkness  perished,  and  light  came  to  many  places which 
 had yet long been hid. But Elwing sat sorrowing at home. 
   Earendel found not Tuor, nor came he  ever on  that journey 
 to the shores of Valinor; and at  last he  was driven  by the 
 winds back East, and he came at a time of  night to  the ha- 
 vens of Sirion, unlooked for, unwelcomed, for they  were des- 
 olate. Bronweg alone sat  there in  sorrow, the  companion of 
 his father of old, and his tidings were filled with  new woe. 
                                                             
   The dwelling of Elwing at Sirion's  mouth, where  still she 
 possessed  the  Nauglafring  and  the glorious  Silmaril, be- 
 came  known  to  the sons  of Feanor;  and they  gathered to- 
 gether from their  wandering hunting-paths.  But the  folk of 
 Sirion would not  yield that  jewel which  Beren had  won and 
 Luthien had worn,  and for  which fair  Dior had  been slain. 
 And so befell the last and cruellest slaying  of Elf  by Elf, 
 the third woe achieved by the accursed oath;  for the  sons of 
 Feanor  came  down  upon  the  exiles  of  Gondolin  and  the 

 

 remnant  of  Doriath,  and  though  some  of their  folk stood 
 aside  and some  few rebelled  and were  slain upon  the other 
 part aiding Elwing against their own lords,  yet they  won the 
 day.  Damrod  was  slain  and Diriel,  and Maidros  and Maglor 
 alone now  remained of  the Seven;  but the  last of  the folk 
 of  Gondolin  were  destroyed  or  forced  to depart  and join 
 them to  the people  of Maidros.  And yet  the sons  of Feanor 
 gained  not  the  Silmaril;  for  Elwing cast  the Nauglafring 
 into the sea, whence it shall  not return  until the  End; and 
 she  leapt  herself into  the waves,  and took  the form  of a 
 white  sea-bird,  and  flew  away  lamenting  and  seeking for 
 Earendel about all the shores of the world.                   
   But  Maidros  took  pity  upon  her  child Elrond,  and took 
 him with him, and harboured  and nurtured  him, for  his heart 
 was sick and weary with the burden of the dreadful oath.      
   Learning  these  things  Earendel  was  overcome  with  sor- 
 row;  and  with Bronweg  he set  sail once  more in  search of 


109 

 Elwing and of Valinor. And it is told in  the Lay  of Earendel 
 that he came at last unto the Magic Isles, and  hardly escaped 
 their enchantment, and found  again the  Lonely Isle,  and the 
 Shadowy Seas,  and the  Bay of  Faerie on  the borders  of the 
 world. There he landed on the immortal  shore alone  of living 
 Men, and his feet  clomb the  marvellous hill  of Cor;  and he 
 walked in the deserted ways of  Tun, where  the dust  upon his 
 raiment and his shoes  was a  dust of  diamonds and  gems. But 
 he ventured not into Valinor. He came too  late to  bring mes- 
 sages to the Elves, for the Elves had gone.(1)                
   He built  a tower  in the  Northern Seas  to which  all the 
 sea-birds  of the  world might  at times  repair, and  ever he 
 grieved for fair  Elwing looking  for her  return to  him. And 
 Wingelot  was lifted  on their  wings and  sailed now  even in 
 the  airs  searching  for Elwing;  marvellous and  magical was 
 that ship, a starlit flower in the sky.  But the  Sun scorched 
 it  and  the  Moon  hunted  it  in  heaven, and  long Earendel 
 wandered over Earth, glimmering as a fugitive star.           
                                                              
                               *                               

 

   1. At the foot of the page is written very quickly and faintly in pencil: 
                                                                             
        Make  Earendel  move  the  Gods.  And  it  is said  that there  were Men 
        of Hithlum repentant of their evil in that  day, and  that so  were ful- 
        filled  Ulmo's  words, for  by Earendel's  embassy and  the aid  of val- 
        iant  Men the  Orcs and  Balrogs were  destroyed, yet  not as  utterly as 
        might have been.                                                      
                                                                             
    At the top of the next page is written; Men turned  the [tide]  (the last 
    word is illegible).                                                       
                                                                             
                           $l7 in the Q II version.                          
                                                                             
    Yet  by  Sirion and  the sea  there grew  up an  elfin' folk,             
  the gleanings of  Gondolin and  Doriath, and  they took  to the             
  waves  and  to  the making  of fair  ships, dwelling  ever nigh             
  unto the shores and under the shadow of Ulmo's hand.                        
    In  Valinor  Ulmo spoke  unto the  Valar of  the need  of the             
  Elves,  and  he  called  on  them to  forgive and  send succour             
  unto  them  and  rescue  them  from  the   overmastering  might             
  of  Morgoth,  and  win  back  the  Silmarils wherein  alone now             
  bloomed  the  light of  the days  of bliss  when the  Two Trees             
  still were shining. Or  so it  is said,  among the  Gnomes, who             
  after  had  tidings  of  many  things  from their  kinsfolk the             
  Quendi,  the  Light-elves  beloved  of  Manwe,  who  ever  knew             
  something  of the  mind of  the Lord  of the  Gods. But  as yet             
  Manwe  moved  not,  and  the  counsels of  his heart  what tale             
  shall tell?  The Quendi  have said  that the  hour was  not yet             
  come, and that only  one speaking  in person  for the  cause of             
  both  Elves  and  Men,  pleading  for  pardon  upon  their mis-             
  deeds  and  pity  on  their  woes, might  move the  counsels of             
  the  Powers;  and  the  oath  of  Feanor  perchance  even Manwe             
  could  not  loose,  until  it found  its end,  and the  sons of             
  Feanor  relinquished the  Silmarils, upon  which they  had laid             
  their ruthless claim. For the light which lit the Silmarils the             
  Gods had made.                                                              
    In those  days Tuor  felt old  age creep  upon him,  and ever             
  a  longing  for  the  deeps  of  the sea  grew stronger  in his             
  heart. Wherefore  he built  a great  ship Earame,  Eagle's Pin-             
  ion,(2) and with Idril he set sail into the sunset  and the West,             

 

                               
                                                              
 and came no  more into  any tale  or song.(3) Bright Earendel 
 was then lord of  the folk  of Sirion  and their  many ships; 
 and  he  took  to  wife  Elwing  the fair,  and she  bore him 
 Elrond Half-elfin.(4) Yet Earendel could not rest, and his voy- 
 ages about the shores of the Outer (5) Lands  eased not  his un- 


110 

 quiet.  Two purposes  grew in  his heart,  blended as  one in 
 longing for the wide sea: he sought to sail  thereon, seeking 
 after Tuor  and Idril  Celebrindal who  returned not;  and he 
 thought to find perhaps the last shore and bring ere  he died 
 the message  of Elves  and Men  unto the  Valar of  the West, 
 that should move the hearts of Valinor and  the Elves  of Tun 
 to pity on the world and the sorrows of Mankind.              
   Wingelot' he built, fairest of the ships of song, the Foam- 
 flower; white  were its  timbers as  the argent  moon, golden 
 were  its  oars,  silver  were  its  shrouds, its  masts were 
 crowned with jewels  like stars.  In the  Lay of  Earendel is 
 many  a  thing  sung  of his  adventures in  the deep  and in 
 lands   untrodden,  and   in  many   seas  and   many  isles. 
 Ungoliant' in the  South he  slew, and  her darkness  was de- 
 stroyed, and light came to  many regions  which had  yet long 
 been hid. But Elwing sat sorrowing at home.                   
   Earendel  found not  Tuor nor  Idril, nor  came he  ever on 
 that journey to the  shores of  Valinor, defeated  by shadows 
 and enchantment, driven by repelling winds, until  in longing 
 for  Elwing  he  turned  him  homeward  toward the  East. And 
 his heart bade him haste, for a sudden fear was fallen on him 
 out of dreams, and the winds that before he had  striven with 
 might not now bear him back as swift as his desire.           
   Upon  the  havens  of  Sirion  new  woe  had   fallen.  The 
 dwelling  of  Elwing  there,  where  still she  possessed the 
 Nauglafring'  and  the glorious  Silmaril, became  known unto 
 the  remaining  sons  of  Feanor,  Maidros  and   Maglor  and 
 Damrod  and  Diriel;  and they  gathered together  from their 
 wandering  hunting-paths,  and  messages  of  friendship  and 
 yet stern demand they sent  unto Sirion.  But Elwing  and the 
 folk of Sirion  would not  yield that  jewel which  Beren had 
 won  and  Luthien  had  worn,  and for  which Dior  the Fair  
 was slain; and least of all while Earendel their lord  was in 

 

 the sea, for them seemed  that in  that jewel  lay the  gift of 
 bliss and healing that had  come upon  their houses  and their 
 ships.                                                        
   And so came in the  end to  pass the  last and  cruellest of 
 the slayings of  Elf by  Elf; and  that was  the third  of the 
 great wrongs achieved by the  accursed oath.  For the  sons of 
 Feanor  came  down  upon  the  exiles  of  Gondolin   and  the 
 remnant  of  Doriath  and  destroyed  them.  Though   some  of 
 their folk stood aside, and some few  rebelled and  were slain 
 upon  the  other part  aiding Elwing  against their  own lords 
 (for  such  was  the  sorrow  and confusion  of the  hearts of 
 Elfinesse  in  those  days),  yet Maidros  and Maglor  won the 
 day. Alone they now  remained of  the sons  of Feanor,  for in 
 that  battle Damrod  and Diriel  were slain;  but the  folk of 
 Sirion perished or fled away, or departed of need to  join the 
 people  of  Maidros,  who  claimed  now  the  lordship  of all 
 the  Elves  of  the Outer  Lands. And  yet Maidros  gained not 
 the  Silmaril, for  Elwing seeing  that all  was lost  and her 
 child Elrond (9) taken captive, eluded the  host of  Maidros, and 
 with the  Nauglafring upon  her breast  she cast  herself into 
 the sea, and perished as folk thought.                        
   But  Ulmo  bore her  up and  he gave  unto her  the likeness 
 of a great white bird, and upon  her breast  there shone  as a 
 star the shining Silmaril, as she flew over the water  to seek 
 Earendel  her  beloved.  And on  a time  of night  Earendel at 
 the  helm  saw  her  come  towards  him,  as  a   white  cloud 
 under  moon exceeding  swift, as  a star  over the  sea moving 
 in strange  course, a  pale flame  on wings  of storm.  And it 
 is  sung  that  she  fell  from  the air  upon the  timbers of 
 Wingelot,  in  a  swoon, nigh  unto death  for the  urgency of 
 her  speed,  and  Earendel  took  her unto  his bosom.  And in 
 the morn  with  marvelling  eyes  he  beheld  his wife  in her 
 own  form  beside him  with her  hair upon  his face;  and she 
 Slept.                                                        
   But  great was  the sorrow  of Earendel  and Elwing  for the 


111 

 ruin of the havens of Sirion, and the captivity of  their son, 
 for  whom  they  feared  death,  and  yet it  was not  so. For 
 Maidros  took  pity  on  Elrond,  and  he  cherished  him, and 

 

 love  grew  after  between  them, as  little might  be thought; 
 but  Maidros'  heart  was sick  and weary"  with the  burden of 
 the dreadful oath. Yet  Earendel saw  now no  hope left  in the 
 lands  of  Sirion,  and  he  turned again  in despair  and came 
 not home, but sought back once more to Valinor with            
 Elwing at his  side. He  stood now  most oft  at the  prow, and 
 the Silmaril he  bound upon  his forehead;  and ever  its light 
 grew  greater  as they  drew unto  the West.  Maybe it  was due 
 in part  to the  puissance of  that holy  jewel that  they came 
 in time to the waters that as yet no vessels save those of the 
 Teleri  had  known;  and  they  came unto  the Magic  Isles and 
 escaped their magic;" and they came into the Shadowy           
 Seas and passed their shadows; and they looked upon the        
 Lonely Isle and they tarried  not there;  and they  cast anchor 
 in  the  Bay  of  Faerie" upon  the borders  of the  world. And 
 the  Teleri  saw  the  coming  of  that  ship and  were amazed, 
 gazing from afar upon  the light  of the  Silmaril, and  it was 
 very great.                                                    
   But  Earendel  landed on  the immortal  shores alone  of liv- 
 ing  Men;  and  neither  Elwing  nor any  of his  small company 
 would he  suffer to  go with  him, lest  they fell  beneath the 
 wrath  of the  Gods, and  he came  at a  time of  festival even 
 as  Morgoth  and  Ungoliant had  in ages  past, and  the watch- 
 ers  upon  the  hill  of  Tun  were  few,  for the  Quendi were 
 most in the halls of Manwe on Tinbrenting's (13) height.            
   The  watchers  rode  therefore  in  haste  to Valmar,  or hid 
 them in the passes of the hills;  and all  the bells  of Valmar 
 pealed;  but  Earendel clomb  the marvellous  hill of  Cor" and 
 found  it  bare, and  he entered  into the  streets of  Tun and 
 they  were  empty; and  his heart  sank. He  walked now  in the 
 deserted ways  of Tun  and the  dust upon  his raiment  and his 
 shoes was a dust of diamonds, yet no one heard his call        
 Wherefore  he  went  back  unto  the  shores  and  would  climb 
 once  more  upon  Wingelot  his  ship;  but  one came  unto the 
 strand and cried unto  him: 'Hail  Earendel, star  most radiant, 
 messenger most fair!" Hail thou bearer of light before the 
 Sun  and  Moon,  the  looked-for  that  comest   unawares,  the 
 longed-for  that comest  beyond hope!  Hail thou  splendour of 

 

  the children of the world, thou  slayer of  the dark!  Star of 
  the sunset hail! Hail herald of the morn!'                     
    And  that  was  Fionwe  the  son  of  Manwe,  and   he  sum- 
  moned  Earendel  before  the  Gods;  and  Earendel  went  unto 
  Valinor  and  to  the halls  of Valmar,  and came  never again 
  back  into  the  lands  of  Men." But  Earendel spake  the em- 
  bassy of the two  races'" before  the faces  of the  Gods, and 
  asked  for  pardon  upon the  Gnomes and  pity for  the exiled 
  Elves and for unhappy Men, and succour in their need.          
    Then  the sons  of the  Valar prepared  for battle,  and the 
  captain  of  their  host  was  Fionwe  son  of  Manwe. Beneath 
  his white banner  marche<i also  the host  of the  Quendi, the 
  Light-elves, the folk  of Ingwe,  and among  them such  of the 
  Gnomes  of  old  as  had  never  departed from  Valinor,"" but 
  remembering  Swan  Haven  the  Teleri  went  not   forth  save 
  very  few,  and  these  manned  the  ships wherewith  the most 
  of that army carne into the Northern  lands; but  they them- 
  selves would set foot never on those shores.                   
    Earendel was  their guide:  but the  Gods would  not suffer 
  him  to  return again,  and he  built him  a white  tower upon 
  the confines of the outer world in the Northern regions of 
  the Sundering Seas: and there  all the  sea-birds of  the earth 
  at  time=-  repaired.  And often  was Elwing  in the  form and 
  likeness of  a bird;  and she  devised wings  for the  ship of 
  Earendel, and it was lifted even into the  oceans of  the air. 
  Marvellous and magical was that ship, a starlit flower  in the 


112 

  sky,  bearing  a  wavering  and  holy flame;  and the  folk of 
  earth beheld it  from afar  and wondered,  and looked  up from 
  despair, saying surely a Silmaril is in the sky, a new star is 
  risen  in the  West. Maidros  said unto  Maglor:" 'If  that be 
  the Silmaril that riseth by some  power divine  out of  the sea 
  into which we saw it fall, then let us be glad, that its glory 
  is  seen  now  by  many.'  Thus  hope arose  and a  promise of 
  betterment; but Morgoth was filled with doubt.                 
    Yet it is said that he looked not for the assault  that came 
  upon  him  from  the  West.  So  great  was  his  pride become 
  that  he  deemed  none  would  ever again  come against  him in 
  open  war;  moreover  he  thought  that  he had  estranged the 

 

  Gnomes  for  ever  from  the  Gods  and  from  their  kin, and                
  that content in their Blissful Realm the  Valar would  heed no                
  more  his  kingdom  in the  world without.  For heart  that is                
  pitiless counteth not the power that pity hath, of which stern                
  anger  may  be  forged  and a  lightning kindled  before which                
  mountains fall.                                                               
                                                                               
   1. elfin > elven                                                               
   2. Earame, Eagle's Pinion > Earrame, Sea-wing                                
   3. Added here:                                                                
                                                                               
        But  Tuor  alone  of  mortal  Men  was  numbered  among  the   elder  race, 
        and  joined  with  the   Noldoli  whom   he  loved,   and  in   after  time 
        dwelt still, or so it hath  been said,  [struck out:  in Tol  Eressea] ever 
        upon  his  ship  voyaging  the  seas  of  Fairyland  [>  the  Elven-lands], 
        or  resting  a  while  in  the  harbours  of  the  Gnomes  of  Tol Eressea; 
        and his fate is sundered from the fate of Men.                          
                                                                               
  4. and she bore him Elrond Half-elfin > and she bore him Elros and              
  Elrond, who are called the Halfelven.                                         
  5. Outer > Hither at both occurrences.                                         
  6. Wingelot > Vingelot at all three occurrences; at the first only, Vingelot 
  later > Wingilot                                                              
  7. Ungoliant > Ungoliante at both occurrences.                                 
  8. Nauglafring > Nauglamir at both occurrences (cf. $14 note 10).              
  9. her child Elrond > her children Elros and Elrond                             
  10. This passage was rewritten thus:                                           
                                                                               
        But great was the sorrow of Earendel and Elwing for the ruin of        
        the havens of Sirion, and the captivity of their sons; and they         
        feared that they would be slain But it was not so. For Maglor took: 
        pity on Elros and Elrond, and he cherished them, and love grew af- 
        ter between them, as little might be thought; but Maglor's heart          
        was sick and weary, &c.                                                 
                                                                               
  11. and they came  unto the  Magic Isles  and escaped  their magic  > and 
      they came to the Enchanted Isles and escaped their enchantment           
  12. Bay of Faerie > Bay of Elvenhome                                           
  13. Tinbrenting 's > Tindbrenting 's                                           
  14. This paragraph was emended at different times, and it is  not perfectly 
      clear what was intended. The first change was the addition,  after lest 
      they fell beneath the wrath of the Cods,  of: And  he bade  farewell to 

 

        all whom he loved  upon the  last shore,  and was  taken from  them for 
        ever.  Subsequently  nor any  of his  small company  seems to  have been 
        removed, with the  result: and  he would  nor suffer  Elwing to  go with 
        him, lest she fell beneath the wrath of the Gods:  but the  previous ad- 
        dition was not struck out.                                               
   15.  Cor > Kor, as previously.                                                
   16.  This passage was altered to read:                                        
                                                                                
          Wherefore  he  turned  back towards  the shores  thinking to  set sail 
          once  more  upon  Vingelot  his  ship;  but  one  came  unto  him  and 
          cried: 'Hail Earendel, radiant star, messenger most fair!'             
                                                                                
   17. came never again back into the lands of Men > never again set foot         


113 

   upon the lands of Men.                                                        
   18. races > kindreds                                                          
   19. Added here: and Ingwiel son of Ingwe was their chief;                      
   20. This passage, from the beginning of the paragraph, was extensively         
   rewritten:                                                                    
                                                                                
           In  those days  the ship  of Earendel  was drawn  by the  Gods beyond 
           the edge of the world, and it was lifted even into the oceans  of the 
           air. Marvellous and magical was that  ship, a  starlit flower  in the 
           sky, bearing a wavering and  holy flame;  and the  folk of  Earth be- 
           held it from afar and wondered,  and looked  up from  despair, saying 
           surely a Silmaril is in the sky, a new star is risen in the West. But 
           Elwing  mourned  for  Earendel yet  found him  never again,  and they 
           are  sundered  till  the world  endeth. Therefore  she built  a white 
           tower upon the confines of the  outer world  in the  Northern regions 
           of the Sundering Seas; and  there all  the seabirds  of the  earth at 
           times repaired.  And Elwing  devised wings  for herself,  and desired 
           to fly to  Earendel's ship.  But [?she  fell back]  ... But  when the 
           flame of it appeared on high Maglor said unto Maidros:                

 

                                        18.                                        

 

   [The whole  of this  section is  again extant  in the  two typescript         
   versions Q I and Q II.]                                                       
                                                                                
       Of  the  march  of Fionwe  to the  North little  is said,  for in         
   that  host  there  were  none  of  the  Elves   who  had   dwelt  and         
   suffered  in  the  Outer  Lands,  and  who  made  these   tales;  and         
   tidings  only  long  after  did  they  learn  of  these  things  from         
   their   distant   kinsfolk   the  Elves   of  Valinor.   The  meeting         
   of  the   hosts  of   Fionwe  and   of  Morgoth   in  the   North  is         

 

                                                             
                                                               
 named  the  Last  Battle,  the Battle  Terrible, the  Battle of 
 Wrath  and  Thunder.  Great  was  Morgoth's  amaze   when  this 
 host  came  upon  him  from  the  West,  and  all  Hithlum  was 
 ablaze  with  its  glory, and  the mountains  rang; for  he had 
 thought  that he  had estranged  the Gnomes  for ever  from the 
 Gods and from  their kin,  and that  content in  their blissful 
 realm  the  Gods  would  heed  no  further  his kingdom  in the 
 world  without.  For  heart  that  is  pitiless counts  not the 
 power that pity hath; nor foresees that of gentle ruth  for an- 
 guish  and  for valour  overthrown stern  anger may  be forged, 
 and a lightning kindled before which mountains fall.'          
   There  was  marshalled  the  whole  power  of  the  Throne of 
 Hate,  and  well  nigh  measureless  had  it  become,  so  that 
 Dor-na-Fauglith  might  by  no  means   contain  it,   and  all 
 the North  was aflame  with war.  But it  availed not.  All the 
 Balrogs  were  destroyed,  and  the  uncounted  hosts   of  the 
 Orcs  perished  like  straw in  fire, or  were swept  away like 
 shrivelled  leaves  before  a  burning  wind.  Few  remained to 
 trouble  the  world  thereafter.   And  Morgoth   himself  came 
 forth,  and  all  his dragons  were about  him; and  Fionwe for 
 a moment was  driven back.  But the  sons of  the Valar  in the 
 end  overthrew  them  all,  and  but  two escaped.  Morgoth es- 
 caped  not.  Him  they  threw  down,  and  they bound  him with 
 the  chain   Angainor,  wherewith   Tulkas  had   chained  him 
 aforetime,  and  whence  in  unhappy  hour  the  Gods  had  re- 
 leased him;  but his  iron crown  they beat  into a  collar for 
 his  neck,  and  his  head  was  bowed  unto  his   knees.  The 
 Silmarils Fionwe took and guarded them.                        
   Thus  perished  the  power   and  woe   of  Angband   in  the 
 North and its multitude of captives came  forth into  the light 
 again  beyond   all  hope,   and  looked   upon  a   world  all 
 changed.  Thangorodrim  was  riven  and  cast  down,   and  the 
 pits of  Morgoth uncovered,  roofless and  broken, never  to be 
 rebuilt; but so  great was  the fury  of those  adversaries that 
 all  the  Northern  and Western  parts of  the world  were rent 


114 

 and gaping, and the sea roared  in in  many places;  the rivers 
 perished  or  found  new  paths,  the  valleys   were  upheaved 
 and  the  hills trod  down; and  Sirion was  no more.  Then Men 

 

 fled away, such as perished not  in the  ruin of  those days, 
 and long  was it  ere they  came back  over the  mountains to 
 where  Beleriand  once  had been,  and not  till the  tale of 
 those days had faded to an echo seldom heard.                 
                                                              
   But  Fionwe  marched  through   the  lands   summoning  the 
 remnants  of  the Gnomes  and the  Dark-elves that  never yet 
 had  looked  on Valinor  to join  with the  captives released 
 from Angband,  and depart;  and with  the Elves  should those 
 of the race of Hador and  Beor alone  be suffered  to depart, 
 if they would. But  of these  only Elrond  was now  left, the 
 Half-elfin; and [he] elected  to remain,  being bound  by his 
 mortal blood in love  to those  of the  younger race;  and of 
 Elrond alone has the blood of the elder race and of  the seed 
 divine of Valinor come among mortal Men.                      
   But Maidros would not  obey the  call, preparing  to fulfil 
 even  yet  the  obligation  of  his  oath, though  with weary 
 loathing and despair. For he would have given battle  for the 
 Silmarils, if they were withheld from  him, though  he should 
 stand  alone in  all the  world save  for Maglor  his brother 
 alone.  And  he  sent  unto  Fionwe  and  bade  him  yield up 
 those  jewels  which of  old Morgoth  stole from  Feanor. But 
 Fionwe said that the right that  Feanor and  his sons  had in 
 that  which  they  had  made,  had  perished, because  of the 
 many  and  evil  deeds  they  had  wrought  blinded  by their 
 oath, and most of  all the  slaying of  Dior and  the assault 
 upon  Elwing.  To  Valinor  must  Maidros  and  Maglor return 
 and  abide  the  judgement  of  the  Gods,  by  whose  decree 
 alone would he  yield the  jewels to  any keeping  other than 
 his own.                                                      
   Maidros  was minded  to submit,  for he  was sad  at heart, 
 and he said: 'The  oath decrees  not that  we shall  not bide 
 our  time, and  maybe in  Valinor all  shall be  forgiven and 
 forgot,  and  we  shall  be vouchsafed  our own.'  But Maglor 
 said that if once they returned  and the  favour of  the Gods 
 was not  granted them,  then would  their oath  still remain, 
 and be fulfilled in despair yet greater; 'and who can tell to 
 what  dreadful end  we shall  come if  we disobey  the Powers 

 

 in their own land,  or purpose  ever to  bring war  into their 
 Guarded  Realm  again?'  And  so  came  it  that  Maidros  and 
 Maglor  crept  into  the camps  of Fionwe,  and laid  hands on 
 the  Silmarils;  and  they  took  to  their weapons  when they 
 were  discovered. But  the sons  of the  Valar arose  in wrath 
 and  prevented  them,  and  took  Maidros  prisoner;  and  yet 
 Maglor eluded them and escaped.                                
   Now the Silmaril that Maidros  held -  for the  brothers had 
 agreed each to take one,  saying that  two brethren  alone now 
 remained,  and   but  two   jewels  -   burned  the   hand  of 
 Maidros, and he had but one  hand as  [has] been  before told, 
 and  he  knew  then that  his right  thereto had  become void, 
 and that  the oath  was vain.  But he  cast the  Silmaril upon 
 the ground, and Fionwe  took it;  and for  the anguish  of his 
 pain and the remorse of his heart  he took  his own  life, ere 
 he could be stayed.                                            
   It is told too of Maglor that he fled far, but he  too could 
 not endure  the pain  with which  the Silmaril  tormented him; 
 and  in  an  agony  he  cast it  from him  into a  yawning gap 
 filled with fire, in the rending of the Western lands, and the 
 jewel  vanished  into  the  bosom  of  the  Earth.  But Maglor 
 came  never  back among  the folk  of Elfinesse,  but wandered 
 singing in pain and in regret beside the sea.                  
                                                               
   In those days there was a  mighty building  of ships  on the 
 shores  of the  Western Sea,  and most  upon the  great isles, 


115 

 which  in  the  disruption  of the  Northern world  were fash- 
 ioned  of old  Beleriand. Thence  in many  a fleet  the survi- 
 vors  of  the  Gnomes,  and  of the  Western companies  of the 
 Dark-elves,  set  sail  into the  West and  came no  more into 
 the  lands  of  weeping  and  of  war;  and   the  Light-elves 
 marched  back  beneath  the  banners  of their  king following 
 in the train of Fionwe's  victory. Yet  not all  returned, and 
 some  lingered  many an  age in  the West  and North,  and es- 
 pecially in the Western Isles. Yet  ever as  the ages  drew on 
 and the Elf-folk faded on the Earth, they would still set sail 
 at eve from our  Western shores;  as still  they do,  when now 
 there linger few anywhere of the lonely companies.             

 

     But in  the West  the Gnomes  returned rehabited  for the                
 most  part the  Lonely Isle  that looks  both East  and West;                
 and  with  them  were  mingled  the   Dark-elves,  especially                
 such  as  had  once  belonged to  Doriath. And  some returned                
 even  to  Valinor,  and  were welcomed  amid the  bright com-                
 panies  of  the  Quendi, and  admitted to  the love  of Manwe                
 and the pardon of the Gods; and the Teleri forgave  their an-                
 cient bitterness, and the curse was laid to rest. But Tun was                
 never again inhabited; and Cor stands still a hill  of silent                
 and untrodden green.                                                         
                                         *                                   
   1. The content of this passage,  from Great  was Morgoth's  amaze..., has 
     been given at the end of $17 in the Q II version, since it appears there 
     before the words Of the march of  the host  of Fionwe  with which  I be- 
     gin $18.                                                                 
                                                                             
                           $18 in the Q II version.                           
                                                                             
     Of the march of the host of Fionwe to the North little is                
 said, for in his  armies carne  none of  those Elves  who had                
 dwelt  and  suffered  in  the  Outer'  Lands,  and  who  made                
 these tales; and  tidings only  long after  did they  leam of                
 these things from their kinsfolk the Light-elves  of Valinor.                
 But Fionwe  came, and  the challenge  of his  trumpets filled                
 the  sky,  and  he  summoned  unto  him  all  Men  and  Elves                
 from Hithlum  unto the  East; and  Beleriand was  ablaze with                
 the glory of his arms, and the mountains rang.                                
     The meeting of the hosts of the West and of the  North is                
 named the Great Battle,  the Battle  Terrible, the  Battle of                
 Wrath  and  Thunder.  There  was  marshalled the  whole power                
 of the Throne of Hate, and well nigh  measureless had  it be-                
 come, so that Dor-na-Fauglith could not  contain it,  and all                
   the North was aflame with war. But it availed not.  All the               
   Balrogs  were  destroyed,  and  the  uncounted hosts  of the               
   Orcs perished like straw in fire, or were swept  like shriv-               
   elled leaves before a  burning wind.  Few remained  to trou-               
   ble the world thereafter. And it is said that there many Men               

 

 of Hithlum  repentant of  their evil  servitude did  deeds of 
 valour, and  many beside  of Men  new come  out of the East;(2) 
 and  so  were fulfilled  in part  the words  of Ulmo;  for by 
 Earendel son of  Tuor was  help brought  unto the  Elves, and 
 by the swords  of Men  were they  strengthened on  the fields 
 of war.' But Morgoth quailed and  he came  not forth;  and he 
 loosed his last assault,  and that  was the  winged dragons.4 
 So sudden  and so  swift and  ruinous was  the onset  of that 
 fleet, as a tempest of a hundred thunders winged  with steel, 
 that  Fionwe  was  driven  back;  hut  Earendel  came  and  a 
 myriad of birds  were about  him, and  the battle  lasted all 
 through  the  night  of  doubt.  And Earendel  slew Ancalagon 
 the  black  and the  mightiest of  all the  dragon-horde, and 
 cast  him  from  the  sky,  and  in  his  fall the  towers of 
 Thangorodrim  were  thrown  down.  Then  the  sun rose  of the 
 second day and the sons' of the Valar prevailed, and  all the 
 dragons were  destroyed save  two alone;  and they  fled into 
 the East. Then were all the  pits of  Morgoth broken  and un- 


116 

 roofed,  and  the might  of Fionwe  descended into  the deeps 
 of  the  Earth,  and there  Morgoth was  thrown down.  He was 
 bound'  with  the chain  Angainor, which  long had  been pre- 
 pared, and his iron  crown they  beat into  a collar  for his 
 neck,  and  his  head was  bowed unto  his knees.  But Fionwe 
 took the two Silmarils that remained and guarded them.       
   Thus  perished  the  power  and  woe  of  Angband   in  the 
 North, and  its multitude  of thralls  came forth  beyond all 
 hope into the light of day, and they looked upon a  world all 
 changed; for so great was the fury of those  adversaries that 
 the  Northern  regions  of  the Western  world were  rent and 
 riven,  and  the  sea  roared  in  through  many  chasms, and 
 there was confusion and great noise; and the  rivers perished 
 or found new  paths, and  the valleys  were upheaved  and the 
 hills  trod  down;  and  Sirion  was no  more. Then  Men fled 
 away, such as perished  not in  the ruin  of those  days, and 
 long  was  it  ere  they  came  back  over  the  mountains to 
 where  Beleriand once  had been,  and not  until the  tale of 
 those wars had faded to an echo seldom heard.                
                       * * * 
   But   Fionwe   marched  through   the  Western   lands  sum- 
 moning  the  remnants  of  the  Gnomes,  and   the  Dark-elves 
 that had yet not looked on Valinor, to  join with  the thralls 
 released  and  to depart.  But Maidros  would not  harken, and 
 he  prepared,  though  with  weary  loathing  and  despair, to 
 perform  even  yet  the  obligation of  his oath.  For Maidros 
 and Maglor  would have  given battle  for the  Silmarils, were 
 they withheld, even  against the  victorious host  of Valinor, 
 and though they stood alone in  all the  world. And  they sent 
 unto  Fionwe  and  bade   him  yield   now  up   those  jewels 
 which  of  old  Morgoth  stole  from  Feanor. But  Fionwe said 
 that the right to  the work  of their  hands which  Feanor and 
 his  sons  had  formerly possessed  now had  perished, because 
 of  their  many  and  evil  deeds blinded  by their  oath, and 
 most of all the slaying of Dior and  the assault  upon Elwing; 
 the  light  of  the  Silmarils  should  go  now  to  the  Gods 
 whence  it  came,  and  to  Valinor  must  Maidros  and Maglor 
 return and there  abide the  judgement of  the Gods,  by whose 
 decree  alone  would   Fionwe  yield   the  jewels   from  his 
 charge.                                                       
   Maglor  was  minded  to  submit,  for he  was sad  at heart, 
 and  he said:  'The oath  says not  that we  may not  bide our 
 time, and maybe in Valinor all shall  be forgiven  and forgot, 
 and we  shall come  into our  own.' But  Maidros said  that if 
 once  they  returned  and the  favour of  the Gods  were with- 
 held  from them,  then would  their oath  still remain,  to be 
 fulfilled in despair yet greater;  'and who  can tell  to what 
 dreadful  doom  we  shall come,  if we  disobey the  Powers in 
 their own land, or purpose ever to bring war again  into their 
 Guarded  Realm?'  And  so  it  came  that  Maidros  and Maglor 
 crept  into  the  camps  of  Fionwe,  and  laid  hands  on the 
 Silmarils, and  slew the  guards; and  there they  prepared to 
 defend themselves to the  death. But  Fionwe stayed  his folk; 
 and the brethren departed and fled far away.                  
   Each took a single Silmaril, saying that  one was  lost unto 
 them  and  two  remained,  and  but   two  brethren.   But  the 
 jewel  burned  the  hand  of Maidros  in pain  unbearable (and 
 he had but  one hand  as has  before been  told); and  he per- 

 

 ceived that it was  as Fionwe  had said,  and that  his right 
 thereto  had become  void, and  that the  oath was  vain. And 
 being in anguish and despair  he cast  himself into  a gaping 
 chasm filled with fire, and  so ended;  and his  Silmaril was 
 taken into the bosom of the Earth.                            
   And it is told also of Maglor  that he  could not  bear the 
 pain with which the Silmaril  tormented him;  and he  cast it 
 at last into the sea, and thereafter  wandered ever  upon the 
 shore  singing  in  pain  and  regret  beside the  waves; for 
 Maglor was the mightiest of the singers of  old, but  he came 


117 

 never back among the folk of Elfinesse.                       
                                                              
   In those days there was a mighty building  of ships  on the 
 shores  of  the Western  Sea, and  especially upon  the great 
 isles, which  in the  disruption of  the Northern  world were 
 fashioned of ancient Beleriand.  Thence in  many a  fleet the 
 survivors  of  the  Gnomes  and of  the Western  companies of 
 the  Dark-elves set  sail into  the West  and came  not again 
 into the lands  of weeping  and of  war; but  the Light-elves 
 marched  back  beneath  the banners  of their  king following 
 in the train of Fionwe's  victory, and  they were  borne back 
 in  triumph unto  Valinor.' But  in the  West the  Gnomes and 
 Dark-elves rehabited for the most part the Lonely  Isle, that 
 looks both East and  West; and  very fair  did that  land be- 
 come,   and  so   remains.  But   some  returned   even  unto 
 Valinor, as all were free to  do who  willed; and  the Gnomes 
 were  admitted  again  to the  love of  Manwe and  the pardon 
 of the Valar, and the Teleri forgave their ancient grief, and 
 the curse was laid to rest.                                   
   Yet  not  all  would  forsake  the  Outer Lands  where they 
 had  long  suffered and  long dwelt;  and some  lingered many 
 an age in the West and North, and  especially in  the western 
 isles  and  the  lands  of  Leithien.  And  among  these were 
 Maglor  as  has  been  told;  and with  him Elrond  the Half- 
 elfin,'  who  after  went  among mortal  Men again,  and from 
 whom alone the blood of the elder race'  and the  seed divine 
 of  Valinor  have  come  among  Mankind  (for  he was  son of 
 Elwing, daughter of Dior,  son of  Luthien, child  of Thingol 

 

 and  Melian;  and  Earendel  his  sire   was  son   of  Idril                
 Celebrindal,  the  fair maid  of Gondolin).  But ever  as the                
 ages  drew  on  and  the  Elf-folk faded  on the  Earth, they                
 would still set sail at eve from our Western shores: as still                
 they  do,  when  now  there  linger  few  anywhere  of  their                
 lonely companies.                                                            
                                                                             
                                      *                                       
                                                                             
  1. Hither written above or replacing Outer at both occurrences.             
  2. In this sentence, in the first 'layer' of emendation,  many Men  > some 
   few  Men  and  many  beside  of  Men  >  some  beside  of Men.  Later the 
   sentence was rewritten rapidly in pencil:                                  
                                                                             
       And it is said that all that were left of the three  Houses of  the Fa- 
       thers  of  Men  fought  for  Fionwe, and  to them  were joined  some of 
       the Men  of Hithlum  who repenting  of their  evil servitude  did deeds 
       of valour against the Orcs; and so were fulfilled, &c.                 
                                                                             
     See note 3.                                                              
                                                                             
 3. Added here at the same time as the rewriting given in note 2:              
                                                                             
       But most Men, and especially those new come out of the East, were      
       on the side of the Enemy.                                              
                                                                             
 4. Added here:                                                                
                                                                             
       for as yet had none of these creatures of his cruel thought assailed 
       the air.                                                               
                                                                             
 5. sons > children (late change).                                             
 6. and there Morgoth was thrown down altered and expanded thus:               
                                                                             
       and there Morgoth stood at last at bay; and yet  not valiant.  He fled 
       unto  the  deepest  of his  mines and  sued for  peace and  pardon. But 
       his  feet  were  hewn  from  under  him,  and  he  was hurled  upon his 
       face. Then was he bound, &c.                                           
                                                                             
     Added here:                                                              


118 

                                                                             
       Yet little joy  had they  in their  return, for  they came  without the 
       Silmarils, and these could  not be  again found,  unless the  world was 
       broken and re-made anew.                                               

 

             
                                                                     
 8. Half-elfin > Half-elven (cf. $17 in the Q II version, note 4).      
 9. the elder race > the Firstborn                                     
                                                                     
                                  19.                                 
                                                                     
 [Q  I comes  to an  end soon  after the  beginning of  this section.] 
                                                                     
   Thus  did  the  Gods  adjudge  when  Fionwe  and the  sons of      
 the  Valar  returned  unto  Valmar:  the  Outer   Lands  should      
 thereafter  be  for  Men,  the younger  children of  the world;      
 but  to  the  Elves  alone  should  the  gateways  of  the West      
 stand ever open; but if they  would not  come thither  and tar-      
 ried in  the world  of Men,  then should  they slowly  fade and      
 fail. And so hath it  been; and  this is  the most  grievous of      
 the fruits of the works and lies  of Morgoth.  For a  while his      
 Orcs  and  Dragons  breeding  again  in  dark  places  troubled      
 and affrighted the world,  as in  far places  they do  yet; but      
 ere the End all shall perish by the valour of mortal Men.            
   But  Morgoth  the  Gods  thrust  through  the  Door  of Time-      
 less Night into the  Void beyond  the Walls  of the  World; and      
 a guard is set for ever on that door. Yet the lies that              
                                                                     
 [Here the  Q I  text gives  out, at  the foot  of a  typescript page, 
 but Q II continues to the end.]                                      
                                                                     
   This   was   the   judgement   of   the   Gods,  when   Fionwe  and 
 the  sons  of  the  Valar  had   returned  unto   Valmar:  thereafter 
 the  Outer   Lands  should   be  for   Mankind,  the   younger  chil- 
 dren  of  the  world;  but  to the  Elves  alone  should   the  gate- 
 ways  of  the  West  stand  ever   open;  and   if  they   would  not 
 come  thither  and   tarried  in   the  world   of  Men,   then  they 
 should  slowly  fade  and  fail.  This  is the  most grievous  of the 
 fruits  of  the  lies  and  works  that  Morgoth  wrought,  that  the 
 Eldalie  should   be  sundered   and  estranged   from  Men.   For  a 
 while   his   Orcs   and   his   Dragons   breeding  again   in  dark 
 places  affrighted  the  world,  and  in  sundry  regions do  so yet; 
 but  ere  the  End  all  shall  perish  by   the  valour   of  mortal 
 Men.                                                                 
   But   Morgoth   the  Gods   thrust  through   the  Door   of  Time- 

 

                                                  
                                                               
 less  Night  into  the  Void,  beyond the  Walls of  the World; 
 and a guard is set for ever  on that  door, and  Earendel keeps 
 watch  upon  the  ramparts  of  the  sky,  Yet  the  lies  that 
 Melko,(1) Moeleg  the  mighty  and  accursed,   Morgoth  Bauglir 
 the  Dark  Power  Terrible, sowed  in the  hearts of  Elves and 
 Men  have  not  all  died,  and  cannot by  the Gods  be slain, 
 and  they  live  to  work  much  evil even  to this  later day. 
 Some  say  also  that  Morgoth  at whiles  secretly as  a cloud 
 that cannot be seen or felt, and yet is, and the  poison, is,(2) 
 creeps  back  surmounting  the  Walls  and visiteth  the world; 
 but  others  say that  this is  the black  shadow of  Thu, whom 
 Morgoth  made,  and  who  escaped  from  the  Battle  Terrible, 
 and dwells in dark places  and perverts  Men-' to  his dreadful 
 allegiance and his foul worship.                               
    After the triumph of the Gods Earendel sailed still  in the 
 seas  of  heaven,  but  the  Sun  scorched  him  and  the  Moon 
 hunted  him  in  the  sky,  [and  he  departed long  behind the 
 world  voyaging  the  Outer  Dark  a  glimmering  and  fugitive 
 star.](4) Then  the Valar  drew his  white ship  Wingelot-- over 
 the land of Valinor, and they filled it with radiance  and hal- 


119 

 lowed  it,  and  launched  it  through the  Door of  Night. And 
 long Earendel set sail into  the starless  vast, Elwing  at his 
 side,(6) the Silmaril upon  his brow,  voyaging the  Dark behind 
 the  world,  a glimmering  and fugitive  star. And  ever and 
 anon  he  returns  and shines  behind the  courses of  the Sun 
 and  Moon above  the ramparts  of the  Gods, brighter  than all 
 other stars,  the  mariner  of  the  sky, keeping  watch against 
 Morgoth  upon the  confines of  the world.  Thus shall  he sail 
 until  he  sees  the  Last  Battle  fought  upon the  plains of 
 Valinor.                                                       
    Thus  spake  the  prophecy  of  Mandos,  which  he  declared 
 in  Valmar  at  the  judgement of the Gods,  and the  rumour of 
 it was  whispered among  all the  Elves of  the West:  when the 
 world  is  old  and  the  Powers   grow  weary,   then  Morgoth 
 shall  come  back  through  the Door out of the Timeless 
 Night;  and  he  shall  destroy  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  but 
 Earendel  shall  come  upon  him  as  a  white flame  and drive 
 him from the airs. Then shall  the last  battle be  gathered on 

 

                                                                   j 
                                                                         
 the  fields  of  Valinor.  In  that day  Tulkas shall  strive with       
 Melko,  and  on  his  right  shall  stand Fionwe  and on  his left       
 Turin  Turambar,  son  of  Hurin,  Conqueror  of  Fate,(7) and  it       
 shall  be  the  black  sword of  Turin that  deals unto  Melko his       
 death  and  final  end;  and so  shall the  children of  Hurin and       
 all Men be avenged.                                                      
   Thereafter  shall  the  Silmarils'  be  recovered  out   of  sea       
 and  earth  and  air;  for  Earendel  shall  descend and  yield up       
 that  flame  that  he  hath  had  in  keeping.  Then  Feanor shall       
 bear  the  Three  and  yield  them  unto  Yavanna   Palurien;  and       
 she  will  break  them  and  with  their  fire  rekindle  the  Two       
 Trees,  and  a  great light  shall come  forth; and  the Mountains       
 of  Valinor  shall be  levelled, so  that the  light goes  out all       
 over  the  world.  In  that  light  the   Gods  will   again  grow       
 young,  and  the Elves  awake and  all their  dead arise,  and the       
 purpose  of  Iluvatar  be  fulfilled   concerning  them.   But  of       
 Men  in  that  day  the  prophecy  speaks   not,  save   of  Turin       
 only, and him it names among the Gods.'                                  
   Such  is  the  end  of  the tales  of the  days before  the days       
 in  the  Northern  regions  of  the Western  world. Some  of these       
 things  are  sung  and  said  yet  by the  fading Elves;  and more       
 still  are  sung  by  the  vanished  Elves that  dwell now  on the       
 Lonely  Isle.  To  Men  of the  race of  Earendel have they at       
 times  been  told,  and most  to Eriol,(10) who alone of  the mor-       
 tals  of  later  days,  and  yet  now  long  ago,  sailed  to  the       
 Lonely  Isle,  and  came  back  to  the  land  of  Leithien" where       
 he  lived,  and  remembered  things  that  he  had  heard  in fair       
 Cortirion, the city of the Elves in Tol Eressea.                         
                                                                         
                                    *                                     
                                                                         
  1. Melko > Melkor (but only at the first occurrence).                    
  2. and yet is, and the poison is > and yet is venomous                   
  3. This sentence was rewritten:                                          
                                                                         
       but others say that this is the black shadow of Sauron, who served 
       Morgoth and became the greatest and most  evil of  his underlings; 
       and Sauron escaped from the Great Battle, and dwelt in dark places 
       and perverted Men, &c.                                             

 

                                                                             
                                                                              
  4. This sentence survives from an earlier point in the narrative in Q I       
     (end of $17, p. 180); in Q II the latter part of it, and he departed long 
     behind the world voyaging the Outer Dark a glimmering and fugitive        
     star, was struck out, since it recurs immediately below.                  
  5. Wingelot not here emended (as in $17 in the Q II version, note 6) to       
     Vingelot.                                                                 


120 

  6. Elwing at his side struck out.                                             
  7. Added here in pencil: coming from the halls of Mandos                      
  8. Thereafter shall the Silmarils > Thereafter Earth shall be broken and      
     re-made, and the Silmarils                                                
  9. among the Gods emended in pencil to among the sons of the Gods             
  10. Apparently changed, in pencil, to Ereol.                                  
  11. Leithien emended in pencil to Britain.                                    
                                                                              
                            Commentary on the Quenta.                          
                                                                              
                                Opening Section.                               
                                                                              
    This passage,  to which  there is  nothing corresponding  in S,            
  may be compared with the  Lost Tales  I. 58,  66 -  7 on  the one            
  hand  and  with the  Valaquenta (The  Silmarillion pp.  25ff.) on            
  the other. This opening section of Q is the origin  and precursor            
  of the Valaquenta, as may be seen from the fall of  its sentences            
  and from many details of wording; while brief as it is  it offers            
  no actual contradictions to the text of the Lost Tales, save in a            
  few details  of names.  The Nine  Valar, referred  to in  S$1 and            
  in the alliterative Flight of the Noldoli (III. 133), are now for            
  the  first  time  identified. This  number was  to remain  in the            
  Eight  Aratar  (eight,  because  'one   is  removed   from  their            
  number', The Silmarillion p.  29), though  there was  much shift-            
  ing in the composition of the  number in  later writings;  in the            
  Lost  Tales  there  were  'four  great  ones'  among  the  Valar,            
  Manwe, Melko, Ulmo, Aule (I. 58).                                            
    The  name  of  Mandos in  the Lost  Tales, Vefantur  'Fantur of            
  Death', who 'called his hall with his own name  Ve' (I.  66, 76),            
  now  becomes  Nefantur. Nowhere  is there  any indication  of the            
  meaning of the first element: but  the new  name bears  a curious            
  resemblance  to  the  Old  English  name  of  Mandos  found  in a            
  list of such names  of the  Valar (p.  255): Nefrea  (Old English            
  ne(o)  'corpse',  frea  'lord').  The  late  change of  Tavros to            

 

  Tauros is made also to the B-text  of the  Lay of  Leithian (III. 
  195, 282).                                                        
    Vana  (here  specifically  given  as Vana)  is now  the younger 
  sister of Varda and Palurien (in the  Lost Tales  these goddesses 
  are not said to be 'related'); in  The Silmarillion  Vana remains 
  the  younger  sister  of  Yavanna.  We  meet  here   the  Gnomish 
  name  of  Melko,  Moeleg,  which  the  Gnomes  will not  use; cf, 
  the Valaquenta (p.  31): 'the  Noldor, who  among the  Elves suf- 
  fered most from his malice, will not utter it [Melkor),  and they 
  name  him  Morgoth,  the  Dark  Enemy  of  the World'.  The orig- 
  inal Gnomish form was Belcha (II. 44, 67).                        
                                                                   
    In  this  section  of  Q,  before  the  replacement  page  (see 
  note  2)  was  written,  the only  important developments  from S 
  are  the  reduction  of the  periods of  the Trees  from fourteen 
  hours to seven (and this only came in with  an alteration  to the 
  typescript, see note 1), and the explicit statement  that Silpion 
  was the elder of the Trees, and shone alone for a time (the       
  Opening  Hour).  It  is  also  said  that  the  Gnomes afterwards 
  called the Trees Bansil and Glingol. In the tale of The Fall of 
  Gondolin these names were expressly those of the Trees of         
  Gondolin (see II. 214 - 16), but (especially since Glingol occurs 
  in a rejected reading in The Cottage of  Lost Play  (I. 22)  as a 
  name of  the Golden  Tree of  Valinor) it  seems clear  that they 
  were  the  Gnomish  names  of  the  original  Trees,  which  were 
  transferred to their scions in Gondolin; in the Lay of  the Chil- 
  dren of Hurin and in the Lay of Leithian, as  here in  Q, Glingol 
  and Basil (later emended to  Glingal and  Belthil) are  the Trees 
  of Valinor. But in The  Silmarillion Glingal  and Belthil  are the 
  particular names of Turgon's images of the Trees in Gondolin.. 
    With the replacement  page in  this section  (note 2)  there are 
  several  further  developments,  and  the passage  describing the 
  periods of the Trees  and the  mingling of  the lights  is effec- 
  tively the final form, only differing from that in The            


121 

  Silmarillion (pp. 38 - 9)  in some  slight rhythmical  changes in 
  the sentences. Yavanna no longer 'plants' the Trees, and          
  Nienna is present at their birth (replacing Vana of the Lost      
  Tales, I. 71-2); the Valar sit upon their 'thrones of  council' in 

 

 the  Ring  of Doom  near the  golden gates  of Valmar;  and the 
 moving  shadows  of  Silpion's leaves,  not mentioned  in S  or in 
 Q as  first written,  reappear from  the Lost  Tales (see  I. 88). 
 Here  also appear  the names  of Taniquetil,  Ialasse 'Everlasting 
 Whiteness',   Gnomish   Amon-Uilas,   and   Tinwenairin   'crowned 
 with stars'; cf. The Silmarillion p. 37:                            
                                                                    
    Taniquetil  the  Elves  name that  holy mountain,  and Oiolosse 
    Everlasting  Whiteness,  and   Elerrina  Crowned   with  Stars, 
    and many  names beside;  but the  Sindar spoke  of it  in their 
    later tongue as Amon Uilos.                                      
                                                                    
  'Elves' is still used  here in  contradistinction to  'Gnomes'; on 
  this usage see pp. 50 - l.                                         
                                                                    
                                  2.                                 
                                                                    
    Q remains close to S  in this  section. I  have noticed  in com- 
  menting  on  S  the  absence  of certain  features that  are found 
  both in the Lost  Tales and  in The  Silmarillion: (1)  the coming 
  of  the three  Elvish ambassadors  to Valinor,  (2) the  Elves who 
  did   not   leave   the   Waters   of   Awakening,  (3)   the  two 
  starmakings  of  Varda,  and  (4)  the  chain Angainor  with which 
  Morgoth  was  bound; and  there is  still no  mention of  them. As 
  I  have  said (p.  92), the  Quenta though  written in  a finished 
  manner is still very  much an  outline, and  the absence  of these 
  elements  may  be  thought  to  be  due  merely to  its compressed 
  nature. Against this, however, in respect of (1), is the statement 
  in Q  that Thingol  'came never  to Valinor',  whereas in  the old 
  story (I. 115) as  in The  Silmarillion (p.  52) Tinwelint/Thingol 
  was  one  of  the three  original ambassadors;  and in  respect of 
  (3), Varda is  said in  Q to  have strewn  'the unlit  skies' with 
  stars. As regards (4), it is said  later in  Q ($18)  that Morgoth 
  was  bound  after  the  Last  Battle  'with  the  chain  Angainor, 
  wherewith Tulkas had chained him aforetime'.                       
    The  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear  is called  the Burning 
  Briar, and the Sickle of the Gods, in the Lay of Leithian.         
    It  is  said  here  that  the Elves  named themselves  Eldar, in 
  contrast both to the old  idea (I.  235) that  Eldar was  the name 
  given  to  them  by  the Gods,  and to  The Silmarillion  (p. 49), 

 

  where Orome 'named them in their own tongue Eldar, the peo-      
  ple of the stars'.                                               
    The original statement in Q that Ingwe 'never came back        
  into the Outer Lands until these tales were near their end' is a 
  reference to his leadership of the March of the Elves of Valinor 
  in the second assault on Morgoth, in which he perished           
  (I. 129). The revised statement given in note 6, saying that 
  Ingwe never came back from the West, is virtually the same as 
  that in The Silmarillion (p. 53); see the Commentary on $17. 
  The Gnomish forms of the names of the three leaders, Ing,        
  Finn, and Elu, are removed by the rewritings given in notes 6, 
  8 and 11; and the use of Quendi for the First Kindred ('who      
  sometimes are alone called Elves', see p. 51) is displaced by 
  Lindar in a late emendation (note 7), while Quendi reappears 
  (note 5) as the name for all the Elves. These late changes be- . 
  long to a new nomenclature that came in after the Quenta was, 
  completed.                                                       
                                                                  
                                 3.                                
                                                                  
    While Q again follows S very  closely here,  there is  one im- 
  portant narrative development: the first appearance of the story 
  of Osse's sitting on the rocks of  the seashore  and instructing 


122 

  the  Teleri,  and  of  his  persuading  some  to remain  'on the 
  beaches of the world' (the later Elves of the Havens of          
  Brithombar and Eglarest,  ruled by  Cirdan the  Shipwright). And 
  with the late addition given in note 7 there appears the removal 
  of  the First  Kindred (here  called the  Lindar) from  Tun, and 
  their sunderance from  the Gnomes;  here there  is a  detail not 
  taken up into subsequent  texts (probably  because it  was over- 
  looked), that the Noldoli of Tun left the  tower of  Ingwe unin- 
  habited, though they tended the lamp.                            
    As  in  $2,  Finn  was emended  to Finwe  (and Ing  to Ingwe), 
  although  the  names  of  the  Noldorin princes  are said  to be 
  given in Gnomish  form, and  Ylmir found  in S  is not  taken up 
  in Q (similarly Oin  in S$3,  but Uinen  in the  opening section 
  of Q).                                                           
    In the passage on the Noldorin princes (a later addition to S) 
  Celegorm  becomes  the friend  of  Orome  (a  development  aris- 
  ing from the later story of Huan, see $10); Finrod's third son, 

 

 Anrod in S, becomes Angrod. On the change Finweg > Fingon          
 see p. 54.                                                         
                                                                   
                                 4.                                 
                                                                   
   Many  touches  found  in  the  story  in  The  Silmarillion  now 
 make  their  appearance in  Q (as  Feanor's wearing  the Silmarils 
 at great feasts, Morgoth's sight of  the domes  of Valmar  far off 
 in the mingling  of the  lights, his  laugh 'as  he sped  down the 
 long  western  slopes',  his  great  cry  that echoed  through the 
 world  as  Ungoliant's  webs  enmeshed  him).  I  have  noticed in 
 my  commentary  on  S that  'the entire  story of  Morgoth's going 
 to  Formenos  (not  yet  so  named)  and  his  speech  with Feanor 
 before the doors has yet to  appear', and  it has  not done  so in 
 Q; but the late interpolation given in note 6, stating that a mes- 
 senger  came  to  the Gods  in council  with tidings  that Morgoth 
 was  in  the  North  of  Valinor  and journeying  to the  house of 
 Finwe,  is the  first hint  of this  element. In  The Silmarillion 
 (p.  72)  messengers  came  to  the Valar  from Finwe  at Formenos 
 telling of Morgoth's first coming there, and  this is  followed by 
 the   news   from   Tirion   that  he   had  passed   through  the 
 Calacirya  - a  movement that  appears at  this point  in S  and Q 
 ('he  escaped  through  the  pass of  Kor, and  from the  tower of 
 Ingwe the Elves saw him pass in thunder and in wrath').            
   There is no mention in S$4 of the great  festival at  this point 
 in the narrative, and its appearance  in $5  looks like  an after- 
 thought (see p. 55); that the same is  still true  in Q  shows the 
 close dependence of the later version on the earlier at this stage 
 in the work.                                                       
                                                                   
                                 5.                                 
                                                                   
   In this section Q as usual contains many details and endur-      
 ing phrases not found in S, such as the wailing of the             
 Foamriders  beside  the  sea,  Feanor's  contempt  for  the  Valar 
 'who cannot even keep their own realm from their foe', the 
 drawn swords of the oath-takers, the fighting on 'the great arch 
 of the gate and on the lamplit quays and piers' of Swanhaven, 
 and the suggestion that the speaker of the Prophecy may have 
 been Mandos himself. There was no mention in S of the        

 

  Gnomes   who   did   not   join   the  Flight   (they  being   those  who 
  were  on  Taniquetil  celebrating  the  festival):  this   now  reappears 
  from  the  Lost  Tales  (I.  176);  nor   was  it   said  that   not  all 
  Fingolfin's people shared in the Kinslaying at Swanhaven.                  
    The  reference  to  'the  song  of  the  Flight  of  the   Gnomes'  may 
  be   to   the   alliterative   poem   The    Flight   of    the   Noldoli 
  (III.   131   ff.),   though   that  was   abandoned  at   the  Feanorian 
  Oath:  perhaps  my  father  still  thought  to  continue  it one  day, or 
  to write a new poem on the subject.*                                       
    The   pencilled   addition   'Finrod   returned'  (note   8)  indicates 


123 

  the  later  story,  according  to  which   Finarfin  (Finrod)   left  the 
  march  of  the   Noldor  after   hearing  the   Prophecy  of   the  North 
  (The  Silmarillion  p.  88);  in  S  as  emended  (note   9)  and   in  Q 
  Finrod  only  came   up  with   Fingolfin  after   the  burning   of  the 
  ships  by  the  Feanorians,  and  only  after  that  did   Finrod  return 
  to Valinor.                                                                
    Helkarakse  reappears  in   Q  from   the  Lost   Tales,  but   is  now 
  rendered  'the  Strait  of  the  Grinding  Ice',  whereas   its  original 
  meaning  was  'Icefang',  and  referred  to  the  narrow  neck   of  land 
  which   'ran  out   from  the   western  land   almost  to   the  eastern 
  shores'   and   was   separated   from   the    Great   Lands    by   the 
  Qerkaringa or Chill Gulf (I. 166 - 7 and note 5).                          
                                                                            
                                      6.                                     
                                                                            
    If  there  ever  was  a  'song  of  the  Sun   and  Moon'   (called  in 
  The  Silmarillion  p,  99  by  an  Elvish  name,  Narsilion) it  has dis- 
  appeared.   The   account   in   Q   scarcely   expands   the   extremely 
  cursory  passage  in  S;  but  the  reason  now  given  for   the  change 
  in  the  divine  plan  is  not  that  the  Gods 'find  it safer'  to send 
  the  Sun  and  Moon  beneath  the   Earth:  rather   it  is   changed  on 
  account   of   'the   waywardness   of   Tilion   and  his   rivalry with 
  Urien',  and  still  more  because  of  the  complaints  of   Lorien  and 
  Nienna   against   the   unceasing   light.   This   element   re-emerges 
  from  the  Tale  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  (I.  189   -  90),   where  the 
  Valar   who   protested  were   Mandos  and   Fui  Nienna,   Lorien,  and 
                                                                            
  (*Later this becomes a reference to 'that lament which is named            
    Noldolante, the Fall of the Noldor, that Maglor made ere he was lost' (The 
  Silmarillion p. 87); but I have found no trace of this.)                   

 

  Vana.  Likewise  the  names  Rana  and  Ur  given  by the  Gods to 
  the  Moon  and  Sun go  back to  the old  story, where  however Ur 
  is  said  to  be  the  Elvish name:  the Gods  named the  Sun Sari 
  (I. 186 - 7).                                                      
    The   Sun-maiden   is   now  named   Urien,  emended   to  Arien 
  (her  name  in  The  Silmarillion),  replacing Urwendi  (< Urwen); 
  she is  said to  have 'tended  the golden  flowers in  the gardens 
  of  Vana',  which  clearly  derives from  the tending  of Laurelin 
  by Urwen(di) in the Lost Tales  (1. 73).  Tilion, the  hunter with 
  the silver  bow from  the company  of Orome,  not Ilinsor,  is now 
  the steersman of the Moon; but as I  noted in  I. 88,  Tilion, who 
  in  The  Silmarillion  'lay  in  dreams  by  the  pools   of  Este 
  [Lorien's  wife]  in Telperion's  flickering beams',  perhaps owes 
  something to  the figure  of Silmo  in the  Lost Tales,  the youth 
  whom  Lorien  loved  and  who  was  given  the task  of 'watering' 
  Silpion.  The  words of  Q concerning  Tilion, *often  he wandered 
  from  his  course pursuing  the stars  upon the  heavenly fields', 
  and the reference to his rivalry with  Urien (Arien),  clearly de- 
  rive from the passage in the old tale  (I. 195)  where it  is told 
  of  Ilinsor  that he  was 'jealous  of the  supremacy of  the Sun' 
  and that 'often he set sail in chase of [the stars]'.              
    A  trace  of  the  old conception  of the  Moon survives  in the 
  reference to 'the  floating island  of the  Moon', a  phrase still 
  found in The Silmarillion (see I. 202).                            
    The  occurrence  cf  the  name  Eruman  of  the  land  where Men 
  awoke  (Murmenalda  in  Gilfanon's  Tale,  'far  to  the  east  of 
  Palisor', I. 232 - 3, Hildorien in The Silmarillion, 'in the east- 
  ward regions of Middle-earth') is strange, and  can only  be re- 
  garded  as  a  passing  application  of it  in a  wholly different 
  meaning, for it was in fact retained in a refinement of  its orig- 
  inal sense  - the  land between  the mountains  and the  sea south 
  of Taniquetil and Kor, also  in the  Lost Tales  called Arvalin 
 (which   is   the  name   given  to   it  in   S  and   Q):  Eruman 
 (>   Araman)   afterwards   became   the   wasteland   between  the 
 mountains and the sea north of Taniquetil (see I. 82 - 3).          
    Though  the  phrase  in  Q  'the oldest  days before  the waning 
 of  the  Elves  and  the  waxing  of mortals'  was retained  in The 
 Silmarillion (p.  103), a  later addition  to Q  (note 6),  not re- 


124 

 tained,  is  more  explicit:  'for  measured time  had come  into the 

 

  world, and the first of days; and thereafter the lives of the El-                 
  der that remained in the  Hither Lands  were lessened,  and their                 
  waning  was  begun.'  The  meaning  of  this is  undoubtedly that                 
  measured  time  had  come  into  the Great  or Hither  Lands, for                 
  the phrase 'thus  measured time  came into  the Hither  Lands' is                 
  found in the earliest Annals  of Beleriand  (p. 353).  This seems                 
  to relate  the waning  of the  Elves to  the coming  of 'measured                 
  time',  and  may  in turn  be associated  with the  following pas-                 
  sage from The Silmarillion (p. 103):                                              
                                                                                   
    From this time  forth were  reckoned the  Years of  the Sun.                   
    Swifter and briefer are they than the long Years of the Trees                   
    in Valinor. In that time the air of Middle-earth became heavy                   
    with the  breath of  growth and  mortality, and  the changing                   
    and ageing of all things was hastened exceedingly.                              
                                                                                   
  In the earlier writings the waning or fading of the Elves is al-                  
  ways, clearly if  mysteriously, a  necessary concomitant  of the                  
  waxing of  Men.* Since  Men came  into the  world at  the rising                  
  of the  Sun it  may be  that the  conceptions are  not fundamen-                  
  tally at variance: Men, and  measured time,  arose in  the world                  
  together, and were the sign for the declining of the  Elves. But                  
  it must  be remembered  that the  doom of  'waning' was,  or be-                  
  came,  a part  of the  Prophecy of  the North  (The Silmarillion                  
  p. 88):                                                                           
                                                                                   
    And those that endure  in Middle-earth  and come  not to                        
    Mandos shall grow weary of the world as with a great bur-                        
    den, and shall wane, and become as shadows of regret be-                        
    fore the younger race that cometh after.                                        
                                                                                   
    On the phrase used of Earendel: 'he came too late', see II.                     
  257; and cf. Q$17: 'He came too late to bring messages to the 
  Elves, for the Elves had gone.'                                                   
                                                                                   
    ( *See II. 326. In one place it was said that the Elves 'cannot live in an air 
    breathed by a number of Men equal to their own or greater' (II. 283), In the 
  Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III. 54) appears the idea of 'the goodness of  
  the earth' being usurped by Men, and this reappears in $14 in both S and Q        
  (in S with the added statement that 'the Elves needed the light of the Trees')) 

 

                                 7.                                 
                                                                   
   In this section Q does scarcely  more than  polish the  text of 
 S and embody the  later alterations  made to  it, and  the content 
 has  been  discussed  in  the  commentary  on  S. In  the sentence 
 added to the end of Q (note 6) there is  a clear  echo of  the old 
 idea  of  the  fading  Elves  of  Luthany,  and  the Elves  of Tol 
 Eressea  who  have  withdrawn  from  the  world  'and  there  fade 
 now no more' (see II. 301, 326).                                   
                                                                   
   Q provides  here new  details but  otherwise follows  S closely. 
 The site of the First Battle (by  later interpolation  called 'The 
 Battle under Stars') is now in the great Northern plain, still un- 
 named  before  its  desolation,  when  it  became Dor-na-Fauglith; 
 in  The  Silmnrillion  (p.  106)  the  Orcs  attacked  through the 
 passes  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow and  the battle  was fought 
 'on  the  grey fields  of Mithrim'.  Feanor's sight  of Thangoro- 
 drim  as  he  died now  appears, and  his cursing  of the  name of 
 Morgoth as he gazed on the  mountain -  transferred from Turin, 
 who  did  the same  after the  death of  Beleg in  the Lay  of the 
 Children of Hurin (III. 87).                                      
   A very  minor structural  change is  found in  the story  of the 
 feign=d offer of a  peace-treaty by  Morgoth. In  S this  was made 
 before the death of Feanor, and Feanor  indeed refused  to treat; 
 after   his   death   Maidros   'induced   the   Gnomes   to  meet 
 Morgoth'.  In Q  'even in  the hour  of his  death there  came to 


125 

 [his  sons]  an  embassy  from  Morgoth acknowledging  his defeat, 
 and offering to  treat, and  tempting them  with a  Silmaril'. The 
 greater force sent by Morgoth is now referred to;  and it  is seen 
 that the numbers of the Balrogs  were still  conceived to  be very 
 great:   but   Morgoth   brought  the   greater,  and   they  were 
 Balrogs'  (contrast  The  Silmarillion:  'but  Morgoth   sent  the 
 more, and there were Balrogs').                                    
   In  the  story  of  the  rescue  of  Maidros by  Finweg (Fingon) 
 the explicit  and puzzling  statement of  S that  it was  only now 
 that  Manwe  'fashioned  the  race  of  eagles'  is  changed  to a 
 statement that it was now that he  sent them  forth; by  the later 
 change of 'sent' to 'had sent' the final text is reached. In Q are 

 

  found the details that Finweg (Fingon) climbed to Maidros un-         
  aided but could not reach him, and of the thirty fathoms of           
  Thorndor's outstretched wings, the staying of Finweg's hand         
  from his bow, the twice repeated appeal of Maidros that               
  Finweg slay him, and the heading of Maidros so that he lived          
  to wield his sword better with his left hand than he had with          
  his right - cf. the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 65): his left 
  wieldeth/his sweeping sword. But there are of course still many      
  elements in the final story that do not appear: as the former         
  close friendship of Maidros and Fingon, the song of Fingon           
  and Maidros' answer, Fingon's prayer to Manwe, and Maidros'           
  begging of forgiveness for the desertion in Araman and waiv-          
  ing of his claim to kingship over all the Noldor.                     
                                                                       
                                    9.                                  
                                                                       
    In this section of the narrative Q shows an extraordinary and 
  unexpected expansion of S, much greater than has been the          
  case hitherto, and many elements cf the history in the pub-           
  lished Silmarillion appear here (notably still absent are the en-  
  tire story of Thingol's cold welcome to the new-come Noldor,          
  and of course the origin at this time of Nargothrond and              
  Gondolin):, but S, as emended and interpolated, was still the         
  basis. A few of the new features had in fact already emerged        
  in the poems: thus the Elvish watchtower on Tol Sirion first          
  appears in Canto VII cf the Lay of Leithian (early 1928); the         
  deaths of Angrod and Egnor in the battle that ended the Siege        
  of Angband, called the Battle cf Sudden Flame in one of               
  the earlier additions in this section (note 19), in Canto Vl of       
  the Lay (see p. 66): the Gorge of Aglon in Canto VII and               
  Himling in Canto X (both passages written in 1928); Esgalduin         
  already in the Lay of the Children of Hurin (but its source in       
  'secret wells in Taur-na-Fuin' has not been mentioned before).        
  But much of the content of Q in this sect!on introduces wholly        
  new elements into the legends.                                        
    The lates pencilled alterations and additions given in the          
  notes were put in a good while afterwards, and the names thus,        
  intrcduced (Taur Danin, Eredlindon, Ossiriand - which was            
  Assariad in Q$14, Dorthonion, Sauron) belong to later phrases.        
  But it may be noticed here that the change of Second Battle to        

 

  Third Battle (note  19) is  explained by  the development  of the 
  Glorious Battle  (Dagor Aglareb,  a late  addition given  in note 
  15), so that the Battle of Sudden Flame became  the third  of the 
  Battles  of  Beleriand.  With  'the Foreboding  of the  Kings' in 
  note 15 cf. The Silmarillion p. 115: 'A victory  it was,  and yet 
  a  warning', or  the reference  may be  to the  foreboding dreams 
  of Turgon and Felagund (ibid. p. 114).                            
    The names of Beleriand given  in one  of the  earlier additions 
  (note  2),  Noldorien,  Geleidhian, and  Ingolonde 'the  fair and 
  sorrowful',  are  interesting.  With  these  may be  compared the 
  list of names  given in  III. 160,  which include  Noldorinan and 
  Golodhinand,  the  latter  showing  Golodh, the  Sindarin equiva- 
  lent  of  Quenya  Noldo; Geleidhian  obviously contains  the same 
  element   (cf.   Annon-in-Gelydh,  the   Gate  of   the  Noldor). 
  Ingolonde   occurs   again   in   the   next  version   of  'The 


126 

  Silmarillion' (the version nearing completion in 1937, see I. 8): 
                                                                   
    And  that  region   was  named   of  old   in  the   language  of 
    Doriath  Beleriand, but  after the  coming of  the Noldor  it was 
    called  also in  the tongue  of Valinor  Ingolonde, the  fair and 
    sorrowful, the Kingdom of the Gnomes.                           
                                                                   
  If  Ingolonde  means  'the  Kingdom  of  the Gnomes',  this name 
  also  should  probably  be  associated  with  the  stem  seen  in 
  Noldo, Golodh. In  much later  writing my  father gave  the orig- 
  inal  form  of  the  word  as   ngolodo,  whence   Quenya  noldo, 
  Sindarin golodh, noting that n  = 'the  Feanorian letter  for the 
  back nasal, the ng of king'.  He also  said that  the mother-name 
  of Finrod (= Felagund)  was Ingoldo:  this was  'a form  of noldo 
  with syllabic n, and  being in  full and  more dignified  form is 
  more or less equivalent to "the Noldo", one  eminent in  the kin- 
  dred',  and he  noted that  'the name  was never  Sindarized (the 
  form would have been Angolod)'.                                    
    How  significant  is the  likeness of  Ingolonde to  England? I 
  cannot certainly answer this; but  it seems  plain from  the con- 
  clusion of Q that England  was one  of the  great isles  that re- 
  mained  after the  destruction of  Beleriand (see  the commentary 
  on $18).                                                          
    The  territory  of  the  other   sons  of   Finrod  (Finarfin), 

 

  Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor, is  now set  in the  pineclad high- 
  lands which afterwards were Taur-na-Fuin.                        
    Quite new in  Q is  the passage  concerning the  Dwarves, with 
  the notable statement that  the Feanorians  'made war  upon' the 
  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost,  changed afterwards  to 'had 
  converse with' them; this led ultimately to  the picture  in The 
  Silmarillion  (p.  113) of  Caranthir's contemptuous  but highly 
  profitable  traffic with  the Dwarves  in Thargelion.  The older 
  view of  the Dwarves  (see II.  247) was  still present  when my 
  father wrote  the Quenta:  though 'they  do not  serve Morgoth', 
  'they are in many  things more  like his  people' (a  hard saying 
  indeed);  they  were  naturally  hostile to  the Gnomes,  who as 
  naturally  made  war  on  them. The  Dwarf-cities of  Nogrod and 
  Belegost  go  back  to the  Tale of  the Nauglafring,  where the 
  Dwarves  are  called  Nauglath  (Nauglir  in  Q, Naugrim  in The 
  Silmarillion); but in the Tale the Indrafangs are the Dwarves of 
  Belegost.                                                        
    The  Feast  of  Reunion,  which goes  back to  Gilfanon's Tale 
  (I. 240) but is not mentioned in S (where there  is only  a ref- 
  erence to the 'meeting' of  the Gnomes  with Ilkorins  and Men), 
  reappears in Q ('The Feast of Meeting'); it is held in  the Land 
  of Willows, not as in The Silmarillion near the pools  of Ivrin. 
  The presence of Men  at the  feast has  been excised,  and there 
  now  enters  the  story  of  the  passage of  Men over  the Blue 
  Mountains (called in an addition Erydluin, note  3) and  the en- 
  counter  of  Felagund, hunting  in the  East with  Celegorm, and 
  Beor.  This  passage  in  Q  is  the forerunner  of that  in The 
  Silmaril/ion (p.  140), with  the strangeness  of the  tongue of 
  Men in Felagund's ears, his  taking up  Beor's harp,  the wisdom 
  that  was  in  Felagund's song,  so that  Men called  him 'Gnome 
  or Wisdom' (note 12). It is interesting to observe that after my 
  father abandoned the use of the word 'Gnome' (see I. 43 -  4) he 
  retained Nom as the  word for  'wisdom' in  the language  of the 
  people of Beor (The Silmarillion p. 141).  The abiding  of Beor 
  with Felagund until his death is mentioned (and in a  late addi- 
  tion the dwelling of the Beorians on Dorthonion, note 14).        
    Hador, called the Tall  and by  a later  change (note  11) the 
  Golden-haired, now first enters, and he is one of the  two lead- 
  ers  of  Men  to  cross  the  Mountains  into  Beleriand. Later, 

 

  whereas  in  the  House of  Beor the  original leader  remained, and 
  new  generations  were  introduced  beneath  him,  in  the  case  of 
  the  House  of  Hador  the  original  leader  was   moved  downwards 
  and  replaced  by  Marach;  but  the   two  Houses   remained  known 


127 

  as the House of Beor and the House of Hador.                         
    Hador  has,  beside  Gumlin  (who  appeared  in  the  second  ver- 
  sion  of  the  Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin as  Hurin's father, 
  III.  115,  126),  another  son  Haleth;  and  this   occurrence  of 
  Haleth  is not  merely an  initial application  of the  name without 
  particular   significance,   but   implies   that   originally   the 
  'Hadorian'  and  'Halethian'  houses  of  the  Elf-friends  were one 
  and  the  same:  the  affinity  of the  names Hador,  Haleth (though 
  Haleth  ultimately  became  the  Lady  Haleth)  goes  back  to their 
  origin  as  father  and  son.  The   pencilled  words   'Haleth  the 
  hunter,  and  little later'  (note 11)  were very  probably intended 
  to go after the words 'After them came', i.e.                        
                                                                      
    They were the first of Men to come into Beleriand. After           
    them came Haleth the hunter, and little later Hador, &c.           
                                                                      
  This  shows  of course  the development  of the  third house  of the 
  Elf-friends,  later  called  the  Haladin; and  with the  removal of 
  Haleth to independent status  as the  leader of  a third  people the 
  other son of Hador became Gundor (note 11). Thus:                    
                                                                      
     Quenta                                                            
   as written.              Hador the Tall.                            
                                                                      
                       Haleth.                                         
                                                                      
                                         Hurin Huor.                   
                                                                      
     Quenta.            Hador the Goldenhaired.               Haleth. 
   as emended.                                                 the. 
                                                              Hunter. 
                                                                      
                      Gundor.                                          
                                                                      
                                         Hurin Huor.                   

 

         The.             Hador the Goldenhaired.                             
    Silmarillion.                                                             
                                                                             
                         Gundor.                                              
                                                                             
                                                Hurin Huor.                   
                                                                             
   Morwen  now  gains  the  name  'Elfsheen', and  the association            
 of the House of Hador with Fingolfin in Hithlum appears.                     
   The  battle  that  ended  the  Siege  of  Angband  had  already            
 been described in Canto VI (III. 212 - 13) of the Lay of Leithian            
 (March 1928); a second  description of  it is  found in  Canto XI            
 of  the Lay  (HI. 275;  September 1930).  By later  additions the            
 name  'The  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame'  (note  19)  and Glomund's            
 presence in it  (note 16)  are introduced  (on the  name Glomund.            
 see  p.  71). Here  also is  the flight  of many  Dark-elves (not            
 Gnomes  as  in  S)  to  Doriath,  to  the  increase  of Thingol's            
 power.                                                                       
   It  is  now  suggested  that  Celegorm  and  Curufin   came  to            
 Nargothrond after the Battle of Sudden Flame as  to a  refuge al-            
 ready in being, and with  them came  Orodreth their  friend; this            
 is to be related  to the  earlier passage  in Q  (55): 'Orodreth,            
 Angrod, and Egnor took  the part  of Feanor'  (in the  debate be-            
 fore the Flight of the Noldoli). That Thingol's halls  in Doriath            
 were the inspiration for Nargothrond is also suggested.                      
   With the account  here of  the challenge  of Fingolfin  and his            
 death  compare the  Lay of  Leithian Canto  XII. This  dates from            
 late September 1930, and is later than this section of Q (see the            
 commentary on $10),  as is  seen by  the reference  to Thorndor's            
 'beak of gold' (line  3616, found  already in  the A-text  of the            
 Lay),  in  contrast  to  his  'claw'  in  Q,  emended  to  'bill'            
 (note 23).*                                                                  
                                                                             


128 

 (*Cf. also 'thirty feet' as the span of Thorndor's wings emended to 'thirty 
 fathoms' in Q$8 (note 7), 'thirty fathoms' in the Lay (line 3618).)          

 

                                 10.                                        
                                                                         '7 
                                                                           
    This  version  of  the  legend  of  Beren  and Luthien  is unlike       
  previous  sections  of  the  Quenta:  for  whereas hitherto  it has    1 
  been  an  independent  extension  of S,  here (for  a good  part of       
  its  length)  it  is  a compression  of the  Lay of  Leithian. Very       
  slight  differences  between  Q  and the  Lay are  not in  my opin-       
  ion significant, but are merely the results of precis.                    
    At  the  end  of the  fight with  Celegorm and  Curufin, however,       
  Q  and  the  Lay  diverge.  In  the Lay  Beren's healing  (not men-       
  tioned  in  Q)  is  followed  by  debate  between  him  and Luthien       
  (3148ff.),  their  return to  the borders  of Doriath,  and Beren's       
  departure  alone  on  Curufin's  horse,   leaving  Huan   to  guard       
  Luthien  (3219ff.).  The   narrative  in   Canto  XI   begins  with       
  Beren's  reaching  Dor-na-Fauglith  and his  Song of  Parting; then       
  follows  (3342ff.)  Luthien's  overtaking  of Beren,  having ridden       
  after  him  on  Huan,  Huan's  coming  to  them shortly  after with       
  the  wolfcoat and  batskin from  the Wizard's  Isle, and  his coun-       
  sel to them. In Q, on the other hand, the story is essentially dif-       
  ferent,  and  the  difference  cannot  be explained  by compression       
  (admittedly at this point severe): for  Huan went  off to  the Wiz-       
  ard's  Isle  for  the  wolfcoat  and  batskin  and  then  Beren and       
  Luthien  rode  North  together  on  horseback,  until they  came to       
  a  point  where they  must put  on the  disguises. This  is clearly       
  the form of the story given  in Synopsis  IV for  this part  of the       
  Lay (III. 273):                                                           
                                                                           
    Luthien heals Beren. They tell Huan of their doubts and de-             
    bate and he goes off and brings the wolfham and batskin                 
    from the Wizard's Isle.                                                 
    Then he speaks for the last time.                                       
       They prepare to go to Angband.                                       
                                                                           
  But  Q  is  later  than  Synopsis  IV,  for  the  idea  had already       
  emerged that Huan. spoke thrice, the third time at his death.             
    It  seems  at  least  extremely  probable,  then,  that  Q$10 was       
  written  when  the  Lay  of  Leithian extended  to about  the point       
  where the narrative turns to  the events  following the  routing of       
  Celegorm  and  Curufin   and  Huan's   desertion  of   his  master.       
  Now  against  line  3031  is  written   the  date   November  1929,       

 

  probably referring forwards (see the  note to  this line),  and the           
  next  date,  against  line 3220  (the return  of Beren  and Luthien           
  to Doriath),  is 25  September 1930.  In the  last week  of Septem-           
  ber  of  that  year  my  father composed  the small  amount remain-           
  ing  of  Canto  X, and  Cantos XI  and XII,  taking the  story from           
  Beren's  solitary departure  on Curufin's  horse to  the enspelling           
  of  Carcharoth  at the  gates of  Angband; and  this part  had not,           
  according  to  the   analysis  above,   been  composed   when  Q$10           
  was  written.*  These  considerations  make  1930 a  virtually cer-           
  tain date for the composition of Q or  at least  the major  part of           
  it; and this fits well with my father's statement {see p.  11) that           
  the 'Sketch' was  written 'c.  1926 -  30', for  we have  seen that           
  the original writing of S  dates from  1926 (III.  3), and  the in-           
  terpolations  and  emendations  to  it,  which  were taken  up into           
  Q,  would  belong  to  the  following  years.  The  statement  in Q           
  that  'in  the  lay  of  Luthien  is  all  told  how  they  came to           
  Angband's  gate'  must  be an  anticipation of  further composition           
  of the Lay that my father was at this time premeditating.                     
    From  here  on  there  are  minor  narrative  divergences between           
  Q  and  the  Lay.  Thus  in the  prose Morgoth  'fashioned' (rather           
  than  bred)  Carcharoth  (cf. Synopsis  III 'fashions',  Synopsis V           
  'fashions'  >  'chooses',  III. 293  - 4).  The wolf's  names Boro-           
  saith,  Everhungry,  and  Anfauglin,  Jaws  of Thirst  (an addition           
  given in note 9), are not  found in  the Synopses  or the  Lay, but           


129 

  the latter, in the  form Anfauglir,  reappears in  The Silmarillion           
  (p. 180) with the same meaning.                                               
    In  the prose  Luthien is  praised for  casting off  her disguise           
  and  naming  her  own  name,  feigning 'that  she was  brought cap-           
  tive  by  the  wolves of  Thu', whereas  in the  Lay she  claims at           
  first to  be Thuringwethil,  sent to  Morgoth by  Thu as  a messen-           
  ger,  and  it  seems  that  her  bat-raiment  falls  from   her  at           
  Morgoth's  command  (lines  3959  -  65), and  that he  divines who           
  she is  without her  naming her  name. In  these features  Q agrees           
  rather  with  Synopsis  III,  where she  does say  who she  is, and           
  'lets fall her bat-garb' (III. 305). It is not said in the Lay that           
  'she flung the magic  robe in  his face'  (but in  The Silmarillion           
  p. 181 'she cast her cloak before his eyes'), and  there is  in the           
                                                                               
  (*Cf. also the internal evidence given in the commentary on $9 that the Fall 
  of Fingolfin in Canto XII is later than Q's account.)                         

 

  prose  the  notable  detail  of  the  Orcs'  secret  laughter  at 
  Morgoth's fall from his throne. In Q  Beren leaps  forth, casting 
  aside  the  wolfcoat,  when  Morgoth  falls,  whereas in  the Lay 
  Luthien  must rouse  him from  his swoon.  The ascription  of the 
  snapping  of  Curufin's  knife  to  dwarvish  'treachery'  agrees 
  however  with  the  verse  ('by  treacherous  smiths   of  Nogrod 
  made',  line  4161)  -  this   feature  is   not  found   in  The 
  Silmarillion, of course; while  the arousing  of the  sleepers by 
  the  sound  of its  breaking agrees  with the  A-text of  the Lay 
  (lines 4163 - 6), not with the  revised version  of B,  where the 
  shard struck Morgoth's brow.                                      
    From  the  point where  the Lay  ends, with  the biting  off of 
  Beren's  hand  by  the  Wolf,  the  Q  account  can  be  compared 
  with  the  Synopses. The  'wanderings and  despair' of  Beren and 
  Luthien  and  'their  rescue  by Huan'  clearly associate  Q with 
  Synopsis V (III. 312), and the marginal  addition (note  11) con- 
  cerning  their rescue  by Thorndor,  their flight  over Gondolin, 
  and their setting down in  Brethil, belongs  with the  brief late 
  outline given in III. 309.  The structure  of events  in Doriath, 
  with  Boldog's  raid  preceding  the  embassy  from  Celegorm  to 
  Thingol,  agrees  with Synopsis  IV (III.  310) rather  than with 
  Synopsis  V  (III.  311),  where  Thingol's  host  moving against 
  Nargothrond  meets  Boldog;  but  Q  agrees  with  Synopsis  V in 
  many  details,  such  as  the  presence of  Beleg and  Mablung in 
  the battle with Boldog, and Thingol's changed view of Beren.      
    At  the end  of this  section the  Land of  the Dead  that Live 
  reaches, in the emendation given in note 15, its final placing in 
  Ossiriand,  and  the  name  Gwerth-i-Cuina  appears for  the Dead 
  that Live (later in Q as originally written,  $14, the  names are 
  Assariad  and  Cuilwarthien,  cf.  i-Cuilwarthon  of   the  Lost 
  Tales).  On  the  name  Geleidhian for  Broseliand/Beleriand, oc- 
  curring in this emendation, see the commentary on $9.             
    On  the  statements  at  the  end  of  this  section concerning 
  Luthien's fate, and the 'long span  of life  and joy'  granted to 
  Beren and Luthien by Mandos, see the commentary on $14.           
    A  matter  unconcerned  with  the  story  of Beren  and Luthien 
  arises at the beginning of this  section, where  it is  said that 
  Beor  was slain  in the  Battle of  Sudden Flame;  in $9,  on the 
  other hand, 'Beor lived till  death with  Felagund'. This  can be 

 

  interpreted  to  mean  that he  died in  Felagund's service  at the 
  time  that his  son Barahir  rescued Felagund,  but such  an expla- 
  nation is forced (especially since in the later form of  his legend 
  his  death  was  expressly  of  old  age,  and  was  a source  of great 
  wonder to the  Elves who  witnessed it,  The Silmarillion  p. 149). 
  It seems more  likely that  there is  here an  inconsistency within 
  Q,  admittedly  surprising since  the two  passages are  not widely 
  separated.                                                          
    For  the  emendation  of  'Second   Battle'  to   'Third  Battle' 
  (note  1)  see  the  commentary  on  $9;  and  with  the  change of 
  Tinfang Warble  to Tinfang  Gelion (note  12) cf.  line 503  in the 
  Lay of Leithian, where the same change was made.                    


130 

                                                                     
                                  11.                                 
                                                                     
    In  this section  the Quenta  becomes, both  in structure  and in 
  much of  its actual  wording, the  first draft  of Chapter  20 ('Of 
  the Fifth Battle') of The Silmarillion.                             
    There  appears  now  the   unwise  and   premature  demonstration 
  of  his  gathering  strength  by Maidros,  warning Morgoth  of what 
  was  afoot  among  his  enemies  and  allowing  him  time  to  send 
  out  his  emissaries  among  the Men  from the  East -  though this 
  is less clear and explicit in Q as originally  written than  it be- 
  comes  with  the rewriting  given in  note 14,  and even  then the 
  two phases of  the war  are not  clearly distinguished.  Some fur- 
  ther  development in  this had  still to  come: in  The Silmarillion 
  the  coming  of  the  Easterlings  into  Beleriand  is  told  at an 
  earlier point (p. 157; cf. note 1 to this section in Q), and it is 
  said  that some  of them,  though not  all, 'were  already secretly 
  under  the  dominion of  Morgoth, and  came at  his call',  the en- 
  try of his  'spies  and  workers  of treason'  was made  easier 'for 
  the faithless Men of  his secret  allegiance were  yet deep  in the 
  secrets of the sons of Feanor' (p. 189). Though these agents of 
  Morgoth are said  in Q  (as rewritten,  note 14)  to have  gone es- 
  pecially  to the  sons of  Ulfang, and  though Bor  and his  sons are 
  mentioned,  there  is  no  suggestion  here  of  the  good  faith of 
  the  sons  of  Bor, who  slew Ulfast  and Ulwarth  in the  midst of 
  the battle {The Silmarillion p. 193).                               
    The  Dwarves  now  play  a  part  in  these  events,   though  only 
  as furnishers  of weapons;  but in  Q they  are shown  as calculat- 

 

                                                                               
                                                                                
   ing and indeed cynical ('we are friends of  neither side  - until             
   it has won'), actuated solely by desire for  gain. In  The Silma-             
   rillion  the  Dwarves  actually  entered  the  war  on  Maedhros'             
   side,  and  'won  renown',  Azaghal  Lord  of   Belegost  wounded             
   Glaurung as the dragon  crawled over  him (p.  193). But  at this             
   time I do not think that my  father would  have conceived  of the             
   Dwarves of the mountains taking any  active part  in the  wars of             
   the Elves.                                                                    
       Whereas in S (as emended, $11 note  1) it  is only  said that             
   'Orodreth  because  of  Felagund  his  brother  will  not  come',             
   there  now  appears  in Q  the small  company out  of Nargothrond             
   who  went  to  the  war  under  the  banners  of  Finweg (Fingon)             
   'and came never back, save one',  the leader  is Flinding  son of             
   Fuilin, who comes out of  the old  Tale of  Turambar and  the Lay             
   of the Children of Hurin, and who is thus given a  fuller history             
   before  he fled  from the  Mines of  Melko to  meet Beleg  in the             
   Forest of Night. In the tale as in the poem (see  III. 53)  it is             
   only said that he had  been of  the people  of the  Rodothlim (of             
   Nargothrond)  and  that  he  was  captured  by  Orcs.   By  later             
   change  in  Q  (note  7) he  becomes Gwindor  son of  Guilin. But             
   it is  notable that  although the  wild onrush  of the  Gnomes of             
   Nargothrond,  that  carried  them  even  into  Angband  and  made             
   Morgoth  tremble  on  his  throne,  was led  by Flinding/Gwindor,             
   his heroic fury had as yet no  special cause:  for the  herald of             
   Finweg/Fingon  who  was  murdered  on  Dor-na-Fauglith  in  order             
   to  provoke  the  Elves  of  Hithlum  to  attack  Morgoth's decoy             
   force is not named.* The next and  final stage  was for  the her-             
   ald  to  become  Gelmir  of  Nargothrond, Gwindor's  brother, who             
   had  been  captured in  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame: it  was in-             
   deed grief for the loss of  Gelmir that  had brought  Gwindor out             
   of  Nargothrond against  the will  of Orodreth  (The Silmarillion             
   p. 188). Thus Flinding/Gwindor,  devised long  before for  a dif-             
   ferent story, ends by being, in his earlier life, the involuntary             
   cause of the loss of the great battle and the  ruin of  the king-             
   doms of the Noldor in Middle-earth.                                           
                                                                                
     (* The statement that 'Morgoth led forth one of the heralds... and slew him 
   upon the plain' certainly does not mean, I think,  that Morgoth  himself came 


131 

   forth and did the deed;  rather 'Morgoth'  here stands  for 'the  servants of 
   Morgoth, obeying his command.')                                               

 

    The account of the  behaviour of  the people  of Haleth  in the 
  rewritten  passage  given  in note  7 shows  my father  in doubt; 
  they made ready for war, then they  abode in  the forest  and few 
  came  forth  'because  of  the  wounding  of  Beren in  the wood' 
  (cf.  'Men  remembered that  wound against  the sons  of Feanor', 
  Q$10;  'Men  remembered  at  the  Marching  Forth',  the  Lay  of 
  Leithian line 3103). In the event, the former idea prevailed: 'In 
  the forest of Brethil Halmir, lord of the People of Haleth, gath- 
  ered his men, and  they whetted  their axes',  and in  the battle 
  'fell most of the Men of Brethil,  and came  never back  to their 
  woods' (The Silmarillion pp. 189, 192).                           
    In this same rewritten passage the later  story of  the founda- 
  tion  of  Gondolin  before  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears is 
  present, with  Turgon coming  forth 'unlooked  for' with  a great 
  host. It is perhaps strange that in the subsequent passage of re- 
  writing  (note 14)  Maidros 'appointed  a day,  and sent  word to 
  Fingon  and  Turgon',  and  'Fingon  and  Turgon  and the  Men of 
  Hithlum...  were  gathered  ready  in the  West upon  the borders 
  of the Thirsty Plain', which does not at all suggest  that Turgon 
  had just arrived, but seems rather to revert to the earlier story 
  (in  S,  note 1,  and in  Q as  originally written)  according to 
  which he was one of  the leaders  of the  Western Elves  from the 
  beginning of the preparations for war ('all the hosts  of Hithlum 
  ...  were  ready  to  his  summons,  and  Finweg  and  Turgon and 
  Huor and Hurin  were their  chiefs'). It  seems that  the emended 
  narrative  in  Q  represents  an  intermediate  stage:  Turgon now 
  emerges from  Gondolin already  long since  in existence,  but he 
  does not march up in the nick of time, on the  day itself,  as in 
  the later story: he comes, certainly unexpected,  but in  time to 
  take part in the final strategic preparations.                    
    The  challenge  to  Morgoth,  summoning  by  silver  trumpets 
  his   host  to   come  forth,   was  afterwards   abandoned,  but 
  Morgoth's decoying  force, 'great  and yet  not too  great', sur- 
  vived,  as  did  Burin's  warning  against premature  attack. The 
  uncontrollable bursting forth of the Elves  of Hithlum  and their 
  allies is brought about in  the same  way as  in the  later story, 
  even though there is still lacking in Q the  fine point  that the 
  one  slaughtered  before their  eyes was  the brother  of Gwindor 
  of Nargothrond; and there is present in the Q narrative the ini- 

 

  tial  success  of  the  hosts  of  Hithlum,  the  near-miscarriage of 
  Morgoth's   plans,   the   sweeping   of   the   banners   of  Finweg 
  (Fingon)  over  the plain  to the  very walls  of Angband.  The final 
  stages of the battle are less fully treated in Q, but all  the essen- 
  tial structure is there; several features are indeed still absent, as 
  the  death  of  Fingon  at  the  hands  of  Gothmog  (but  the  flame 
  from  his  helm  as  it  was  cloven  is  mentioned,  a  feature that 
  goes  back  to  the  Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, and  from which 
  the  words  Finweg  (Fingon)  fell  in  flame  of swords  derive, see 
  III.  103), the  fall of  the Men  of Brethil  in the  rearguard (see 
  above),  the  presence  of   the  Dwarves   of  Belegost   (with  the 
  death  of  Azaghal  and  the  wounding  of  the dragon),  the fateful 
  words   between   Huor   and   Turgon   that   were    overheard   by 
  Maeglin (The Silmarillion p. 194).                                    
    Glomund's  presence  at   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered   Tears  was 
  introduced in a later addition to  the text  of S  ($13, note  3) and 
  is  now  incorporated  in  the  Q  narrative; his  earlier appearance 
  at  the  Battle  of  Sudden  Flame  enters  with  an addition  to Q$9 
  (note 16), and  is referred  to again  here (note  17) -  'the second 
  battle   of   the   North',  because   the  Glorious   Battle,  Dagor 
  Aglareb,  which  became  the  second  battle,  had  not yet  been de- 
  veloped.  But  according  to  Q  the  dragon  'was  not  yet  come to 
  his  full  growth'  at  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears;  later, he 
  was  already  full  grown  at  the  Battle   of  Sudden   Flame  (The 
  Silmarillion  p.  151),  and  his  first,  immature   emergence  from 
  Angband was placed still further back {ibid. pp. 116 - 17).           


132 

    The  Dragon-helm  of   Dor-lomin  here   reappears  from   the  Lay 
  of the Children  of Hurin  (see III.  26, 126),  where in  the second 
  version it is said that it was the work of Telchar, and               
                                                                       
       Would that he [Hurin] had worn it to ward his head               
       on that direst day from death's handstroke! (665 - 6)            
                                                                       
  But   only   now   does   the  dragon-crest   become  the   image  of 
  Glomund.  Afterwards  the  h!  story  of  the   helm  was   much  en- 
  larged:  in  the  Narn i  Hin Hurin  (Unfinished Tales  p. 75)  it is 
  told  that  Telchar  (of Nogrod,  not as  in Q  of Belegost)  made it 
  for  Azaghal  of  Belegost,  and  that  it  was   given  by   him  to 
  Maedhros,  by   Maedhros  to   Fingon,  and   by  Fingon   to  Hador, 

 

  whence  it  descended  to  Hador's  grandson   Hurin.  In   the  Narn 
  it is said that Hurin never in fact wore it; and also that the peo- 
  ple  of  Hithlum  said  'Of  more  worth  is  the Dragon  of Dorlomin 
  than  the  gold-worm  of  Angband!'  -   which  originated   in  this 
  passage  of  Q,  'We  have  a  dragon  of  more  worth  than theirs'. 
  A   pencilled   direction  against   the  beginning   of  $12   in  Q 
  (note  1)  postpones  the  introduction  of  the  Helm  to  the point 
  where  Morwen  sends  it  to  Thingol,  as  it   is  placed   in  The 
  Silmarillion (p. 199).                                                
    Some  other  minor  features now enter, as Melian's counsel  to 
  restore  the  Silmaril  to  the  sons  of  Feanor  (The  Silmarillion 
  p.  189),  and  in additions  to the  text the  presence of  Elves of 
  the Falas  among the  Western hosts  at the  great battle  (note 14), 
  and  the  especial  hatred  and  fear  felt by  Morgoth of  the House 
  of  Fingolfin  (note  23;  The  Silmarillion  p.  196,  where however 
  the  reasons  for  it  are  their  frierdship with Ulmo and the 
  wounds  that  Fingolfin  had  given  him  -  and  Turgon, Fingolfin's 
  son).  In  emendations  to  Q  (note  6)  the  name  Celegorm  begins 
  a long uncertainty between that form and Celegorn.                    
    The  mention  of  'Dark-elves,  save   cut  of   Doriath'  marching 
  to  Maidros'  banners  shows  that  my  father  still  naturally used 
  this  term of  Thingol's people; cf. the  Index to  The Silmarillion, 
  entry Dark Elves.                                                     
                                                                       
                                   12.                                  
                                                                       
    It  is  immediately  apparent,  from  many  actual  repetitions  of 
  wording,  that  when  my  father  composed  the  Q  version  of  the 
  tale  of  Turin  Turambar  he  had  the  'Sketch'  in front  of him; 
  while  many  of  the  phrases  that  occur  in The  Silmarillion ver- 
  sion are  first found  here. There  are also  features in  Q's narra- 
  tive  that  derive  from  the Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin  but 
  which  were  omitted  in  S.  The  statement in  Q, repeated  from S, 
  that  the  fate  of  Turin  is  told  in the  <Children of  Hurin> no 
  doubt  shows  that  my father  had not  yet given  up all  thought of 
  completing that poem some day.                                        
    In this first  of the  two sections  into which  the tale  of Turin 
  is  here  divided  there  are  only  minor points  to be  noticed. Q, 
  though much fuller than  S, is  still expressly  a synopsis,  and the 
  entire  element  of  the  Dragonhelm  is  omitted  (see  note  1  and 

 

  the  commentary  on  $11),  together   with  the   guiding  of   Turin  by 
  the  two  old  men  and  the  return  of  one  of  them  to   Morwen:  the 
  guides   (Halog   and   Mailgond   in   S)  are   here  not   named.  Rian 
  Huor's wife has already appeared in S at a later point ($16).              
    Airin,   wife   of   Brodda   and   kinswoman   of   Morwen,   re-enters 
  from  the  old  Tale  (she  is   mentioned  in   S$13  but   not  named),* 
  and  the  aid  she  gives  to  Morwen  is   secret,  which   perhaps  sug- 
  gests   a   movement   towards   the   worsening  of   Brodda's  character 
  as tyrant  and oppressor  (see II.  127), though  later in  Q it  is still 
  told  that  Morwen  entrusted  her  goods  to  him   when  she   left  her 
  home  (the  text  was  subsequently   altered  here,   $13  note   5).  We 
  meet  here   the  expression   'the  incoming   Men',  surviving   in  the 
  term  'Incomers'  used  in  the  Narn,  and  also  the  element  that  the 
  Easterlings   were   afraid  of   Morwen,  whispering   that  she   was  a 


133 

  witch skilled in Elvish magic.                                             
    There  has  been  virtually   no  further   development  in   the  story 
  of  Turin  in  Doriath,  the  slaying  of  Orgof,  and  the  outlaw  band. 
  Blodrin  the  traitor  is  now  described  as  a  Gnome,  and  by  a later 
  addition  (note  5)  a  member  of  the  House  of  Feanor;  in   the  Lay 
  (as  in  S)  it  is  not  made  clear  who  he was,  beyond the  fact that 
  he  was  an  Elf  who  had  been  tumed  to   evil  during   his  upbring- 
  ing among the Dwarves (III. 52).                                           
    In  the   passage  concerned   with  Taur-na-Fuin   there  is   the  new 
  detail  that  the  Orc-band   that  captured   Turin  'had   delayed  long 
  in   the   lands   plundering  East   among  Men',   which  is   found  in 
  The  Silmarillion  (p.  206):  the  Orcs  'had  tarried  on   their  road, 
  hunting  in  the  lands  and  fearing  no  pursuit  as  they  came  north- 
  ward'.   This   feature   clearly   arose  from   a  feeling   that  Beleg 
  would  never  have  caught  up  with  the  Orcs   if  they   had  returned 
  swiftly  to  Angband,  but  in  both  S   and  Q   they  were   moving  in 
  haste  through  Taur-na-Fuin,  and  in  Q  this   is  explained   by  'the 
  angry message of Morgoth'.                                                 
    The  addition  concerning  Beleg's   sword  (note   10)  is   the  first 
  indication  that  it  was  of  a  strange  nature;  the  phrase  'made  of 
  iron  that  fell  from  heaven as  a blazing  star, and  it would  cut all 
                                                                            
  (*In  the Tale  Airin was  Morwen's friend  (II. 93);  in S  and Q  she was 
  Morwen's kinswoman; in The Silmarillion (p. 198) and the Narn (p. 69) she 
  was Hurin's kinswoman.)                                                     

 

                                              
                                                                  
 earth-dolven iron' is found  in The  Silmarillion at  a different 
 point (p. 201), where the origin of the sword is more fully told. 
                                                                  
                                13.                                 
                                                                  
  There are several  substantial developments  in the  latter part 
 of the story of Turin in Q.                                       
  Finduilas'   name   Failivrin  is   now  ascribed   to  Flinding 
 (Gwindor); in the Lay occur the lines                             
                                                                  
          the frail Finduilas that Failivrin,                      
        the glimmering sheen on the glassy pools                   
        of Ivrin's lake the Elves in love                          
        had named anew.                  (III. 76, lines 2175 - 8) 
                                                                  
 In  Nargothrond  Turin,  as  the Black  Sword, is  Mormaglir, not 
 as  in  S  Mormakil  (cf. the  Tale of  Turambar, II.  84: 'Hence 
 comes  that  name  of  Turin's  among  the  Gnomes,  calling  him 
 Mormagli  or  Mormakil  according  to  their speech').  The final 
 form was Mormegil.  It is  now expressly  stated that  though ru- 
 mour  of  the  Black  Sword of  Nargothrond reached  Thingol 'the 
 name of Turin was not heard',  but there  is still  no suggestion 
 that Turin deliberately concealed his identity.                   
  The  place  where  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond   were  defeated 
 is not  said to  be between  the rivers  Ginglith and  Narog (The 
 Silmarillion  p.  212),  but  'upon the  Guarded Plain,  north of 
 Nargothrond', and as will be seen later  the battlefield  at this 
 time was east of Narog, not in  the triangle  of land  between it 
 and  Ginglith.  The impression  is given  that the  reproaches of 
 Flinding  (Gwindor)  as  he  died were  on account  of Finduilas. 
 There is indeed no suggestion  here that  Turin's policy  of open 
 war  was  opposed  in Nargothrond,  nor that  it was  this policy 
 that  revealed  Nargothrond  to  Morgoth;  but  since  these ele- 
 ments  were  fully  present  in  the Tale  of Turambar  (II. 83-4) 
 their  absence  from  Q must  be set  down to  compression. There 
 is also no mention  at this  point in  Q of  the bridge  over the 
 Narog (see S$13 notes 1 and 5), but  it is  referred to  later in 
 this  section  as  having  proved  the  undoing  of the  Elves of 
 Nargothrond. Orodreth  was slain  at Nargothrond,  and not  as in 
 The Silmarillion on the battlefield.                              

 


134 

    In an alteration to Q (note 9) a shift is  implied in  the motive             
  of Turin's slaying  of Brodda.  In the  Tale Turin  struck Brodda's             
  head off  in explicit  vengeance on  'the rich  man who  addeth the             
  widow's little to his  much' (II.  90); in  the revised  passage in             
  Q  (as afterwards  in The  Silmarillion, p.  215, and  most clearly             
  in the Narn, pp. 107 - 8) Turin's  action sprang  in part  from the             
  fury  and  agony  of his  realisation that  the dragon  had cheated             
  him.*                                                                           
    Whereas  in  S  the  Woodmen  are  placed 'east  of Narog',  in Q             
  they  are  said  to  dwell  'in  the  green  woods about  the River             
  Taiglin that enters the land of Doriath ere it joins with the great             
  waters of Sirion' - these  being the  first occurrences  of Taiglin             
  and  'Doriath  beyond  Sirion'  in  the  texts  (though   both  are             
  marked on  the earliest  'Silmarillion' map,  see insert).  I noted             
  in  connection  with  the  passage  in  S that  it is  strange that             
  whereas  in  the  Tale  the  Woodmen  had  a  leader  (Bethos) when             
  Turin joined them, as also in the  later story,  in S  Turin 'gath-             
  ered  a  new  people'.  Now  in  Q the  Woodmen have  an. identity,             
  'the remnant of the people of  Haleth', Haleth  being at  this time             
  the  son  of  Hador  and  uncle  of Hurin,  and the  'Hadorian' and             
  'Halethian' houses one and the same,  as already  in $9;  but still             
  as  in  S  Turin  at once  becomes their  ruler. Brandir  the Lame,             
  son  of  Handir  son of  Haleth, does  indeed emerge  here, replac-             
  ing  Tamar  (son  of  Bethos  the  ruler) of  the Tale  of Turambar             
  who is still present in S, and it is said that Brandir had 'yielded             
  the rule to Turin at the choice of the woodfolk', but in  the later             
  story it is  an important  element that  Brandir remained  the tit-             
  ular ruler until his death, though disregarded by Turin.                        
    Here  is  the  first   mention  of   Turin's  vain   seeking  for             
  Finduilas  when  he  came  down  from  Hithlum,  and the  first ac-             
  count of Finduilas' fate; in the  Tale and  in S  there is  no sug-             
  gestion of what became of her. Finduilas is 'the  last of  the race             
  of  Finrod'  (later  Finarfin)  because   Galadriel  had   not  yet             
  emerged.                                                                        
    The narrative  of Q  also advances  to the  later form  in making             
  Nienor   accompany   the  expedition   from  Doriath   in  disguise             
  (see II. 128); and the 'high  place... covered  with trees'  of the             
                                                                                 
  (*In the Narn it is not made clear that Turin actually intended to kill Brodda 
  when he hurled him across the table.)                                           

 

  Tale and the 'hill-top' of S now becomes 'the tree-clad  Hill of 
  Spies'.  But in  Q it  was only  Morwen who  was set  for safety 
  on the Hill of Spies:  there is  no mention  of what  Nienor did 
  until  she  was  confronted  by  Glomund on  the banks  of Narog 
  (not, as later, on the Hill). This is a movement away  both from 
  the  Tale  and  from the  later story,  where Morwen  and Nienor 
  remained together until  the dragon-fog  arose; but  towards the 
  later story in that Nienor met the dragon  alone (on  the treat- 
  ment of  this in  S see  the commentary).  We must  suppose that 
  at this stage in the  development of  the legend  Nienor's pres- 
  ence was never revealed, either to her mother or to  anyone else 
  save the dragon; in  the later  story she  was discovered  at the 
  passage  of  the  Twilit  Meres (The  Silmarillion p.  217, Narn 
  pp. 114 - 15). The 'Mablung-element' is still wholly absent; and 
  it is to be noted that Morwen was  taken back  in safety  to the 
  Thousand  Caves,  whence  she  afterwards  wandered   away  when 
  she  found  that  Nienor  was  gone.  -  The  bridge  over Narog 
  seems  to  have  been  still  standing  after  the sack  (in The 
  Silmarillion Glaurung broke it down, p. 214).                    
    By emendation in Q (note 14)  appears for  the first  time the 
  name  Celebros, translated  'Foam-silver', for  Silver-bowl; but 
  in Q (as in S) the falls are  still in  the Taiglin  itself (see 
  II.  132).  Later,  Celebros  became the  name of  the tributary 
  stream in  which  were  the  falls;  and  the  falls  were named 
  Dimrost, the Rainy Stair.                                        
    In the story of the slaying of the dragon, the six (not as af- 
  terwards  two) companions  of Turambar  still survive  through S 
  from the Tale (II. 106); though in Q they were  not so  much the 


135 

  only  companions  that  Turambar could  find but  rather 'begged 
  to come with him'. In the Tale  the band  of seven  clambered up 
  the far side of the ravine in the evening  and stayed  there all 
  night;  at  dawn of  the second  day, when  the dragon  moved to 
  cross,  Turambar  saw  that  he had  now only  three companions, 
  and  when  they  had  to  climb  back down  to the stream-bed to 
  come up under Glorund's belly  these three  had not  the courage 
  to go up  again. Turambar  slew the  dragon by  daylight; Niniel 
  went down to the ravine on  the second  evening, and  threw her- 
  self over the falls at sunrise  of the  third day;  and Turambar 
  slew himself in the afternoon of that day. In S the only indica- 

 

                                                                     
                                                                        
  tion  of  time  is  that  all  six  of Turambar's  companions deserted 
  him during the night spent clingirg to the further lip of the ra- 
  vine.  In  Q the  six all  deserted Turambar  during the  first night, 
  as  in  S,  but  he  spent  the  whole of  the following  day clinging 
  to  the  cliff;  Glomund  moved  to  pass  over  the  ravine   on  the 
  second  night  (my  father   clearly  wished   to  make   the  dragon- 
  slaying take  place in  darkness, but  achieved this  at first  by ex- 
  tending  the time  Turambar  spent  in  the  gorge).  But  Niniel went 
  down  and  found  him,  and  threw  herself  over  the falls,  on that 
  same  night.  Thus  in  Q  the  story  has  moved  closer  to  that of 
  The  Silmarillion  and  the  Narn,  and  needed  only  the contraction 
  of  the  time  before  the  dragon  crossed  the  ravine, so  that all 
  took  place  in  a  single  night  and  the  following  morning.  - It 
  seems  to  be  suggested  in  Q  that  Glomund  in   his  death-throes 
  hurled  himself  back  on  to  the  bank  from   which  he   was  com- 
  ing;  he  'coiled  back  in  anguish  ...  and   came  not   into  the 
  woodmen's  land'.  If  this  is so  Niniel must  have crossed  the ra- 
  vine to reach  Turambar. In  the Tale  (II. 107)  it is  explicit that 
  'almost   had  [the   dragon]  crossed   the  chasm   when  Gurtholfin 
  pierced  him,  and  now  he cast  himself upon  its farther  bank', as 
  also in the later versions.                                            
    That  Niniel  was  with  child  by  Turambar  is  now stated  in the 
  text as  written (in  the Tale  and in  S this  appears only  in later 
  additions).                                                            
    In  the  Tale  (II.  111)  Turambar  slew  himself  in the  glade of 
  Silver  Bowl;  it  is not  said in  S or  in Q  where he  died, though 
  in  both  he  was  buried  beside  Silver  Bowl.  -  At  the  very end 
  appears  in  Q  the  name  Nen-Girith,  its  first   occurrence:  'Men 
  changed  the  name  of  that  place  thereafter  to   Nen-Girith,  the 
  Shuddering  Water.'  In  The  Silmarillion  (p.  220)  it is  said, in 
  the  passage  describing  the  great  fit of  shuddering that  came on 
  Nienor  at  Dimrost,  the  falls  of  Celebros, that  - on  account of 
  this  -  'afterwards that  place was  called Nen  Girith', and  in the 
  Narn  (p.  123)  that  'after  that  day'  it  was called  Nen Girith. 
  These  passages  can  be  taken  to  mean that  the falls  of Celebros 
  were  renamed  Nen  Girith  simply  on   account  of   Nienor's  shiv- 
  ering  when  she  first  came there.  But this  is surely  absurd; the 
  event  was,  in itself  and without  aftermath, far  too slight  for a 
  renaming  -  too  slight,  indeed  for  narrative  mention  or legend- 

 

  ary recollection, if it had no aftermath: places are not renamed 
  in legend because a  person, however  important, caught  a chill 
  there. Obviously the prophetic element is  the whole  point, and 
  it  goes  back  to  the  Tale,  where before  ever the  name Nen 
  Girith  was  devised  Nienor  'not knowing  why was  filled with 
  a dread and could not look upon the  loveliness of  that foaming 
  water'  (II, 101),  and in  the original  story both  Nienor and 
  Turambar died in that very place (see II.  134-5). I  think that 
  the phrase in the Narn, 'after that day', must be interpreted to 
  mean 'after that time', 'after the  events which  are now  to be 
  described  had  come  to  pass'.  I  noted  in  Unfinished Tales 
  (p. 149, note 24):                                                  
                                                                     
    One might  suppose that  it was  only when  all was  over, and 
    Turin and Nienor dead,  that her  shuddering fit  was recalled 


136 

    and  its  meaning seen,  and Dimrost  renamed Nen  Girith; but 
    in the legend Nen Girith is used as the name throughout.          
                                                                     
  Almost certainly, the use of the name 'Nen Girith' in  the later 
  narratives  before  the  account  of the  events that  must have 
  given rise to the name is  to be  explained in  the same  way as 
  that  proposed  by my  father for  Mablung: concerning  which he 
                                                                     
  Silmaril from the belly of Carcharoth                               
                                                                     
    the  hand  [of  Beren]  and jewel  seemed to  have so  great a  j 
    weight  that   Mablung's  own   hand  was   dragged  earthward  i 
    and forced open, letting the other fall to the ground.  It was 
    said  that  Mablung's  name  ('with  weighted hand')  was pro- 
    phetic; but it may have been a title derived from  the episode 
    that afterwards became the one that the  hero was  chiefly re- 
    membered by in legend.                                            
                                                                     
  I have no doubt that  the story  in Q  shows the  original idea: 
  Nienor  shivered with  prophetic but  unconscious fear  when she 
  came to the falls of Celebros;  there both  she and  her brother 
  died horrifyingly; and after their deaths the falls were renamed 
  Nen  Girith,  the  Shuddering  Water,  because  the  meaning was 
  understood.  'Afterwards',  'After  that  day', this  became the 

 

  name  of  the  falls;  but in  the legendary  history, when  all was 
  well-known  both to  the historian  and to  his audience,  the later 
  name became generalised, like that of Mablung.                       
                                                                      
                                   14.                                 
                                                                      
    At  the  beginning of  this section  it is  made clear  that Mim's 
  presence  in  Nargothrond  did  not  go  back  to  the  time  of the 
  dragon,   since   he   'had   found  the   halls  and   treasure  of 
  Nargothrond  unguarded'.  In  the  Lost  Tales  my  father doubtless 
  saw  no  particular  need  to  'explain' Mim;  he was  simply there, 
  a  feature of  the narrative  situation, like  Andvari the  Dwarf in 
  the Norse Volsung legend. But in Q the first step is taken to 
  relate  him  to  the  developing  conception   of  the   Dwarves  of 
  Middle-earth:  they  spread  into  Beleriand  from  the  Blue  Moun- 
  tains  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.   (Ultimately  the 
  need  to  'explain'  Mim  led  to  the  conception  of   the  Petty- 
  dwarves.)  But  Q's  statement  that  the  Dwarves  only  now  enter 
  the  tales  of  the  ancient  world seems  at variance  with earlier 
  passages:  with  $9,  where  it  is  said  that the  Feanorians made 
  war  on  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost,  and  with  $11, 
  concerning  the  furnishing  of  weapons  by  the  Dwarves   to  the 
  armies of the Union of Maidros.                                      
    Here  Mim  has  some  companions,  slain  with  him  by  the  out- 
  laws  of  Hurin's  band,  whom  Hurin  'would  have stayed',  in the 
  Tale  of  Turambar  (II.  113)  Mim  was  alone,  and  it  was  Urin 
  himself  who  gave  him   his  death-blow.   Whereas  in   the  Tale 
  Urin's  band  -  large  enough  to be  called a  host -  brought the 
  treasure  of  Nargothrond to  the caves  of Tinwelint  in a  mass of 
  sacks  and  rough boxes  (while in  S there  is no  indication what- 
  soever  of  how  the  treasure  came  to  Doriath,  and  the outlaws 
  are  not  further  mentioned  after  the  slaying  of  Mim),   in  Q 
  Hurin's  outlaws  are  as  conveniently  got  rid  of  as  they were 
  conveniently come by - 'each one died or was slain in quarrels 
  upon the road', deaths ascribed to Mim's curse; and since      
  Hurin now goes alone to Doriath and gets Thingol's help in the 
  transportation of the treasure the outlaw-band seems to serve 
  very little narrative purpose. The fight in the halls of Tinwelint 
  between the woodland Elves and the outlaws, not mentioned in 
  S, has now therefore been expunged (the emergence in Q of a      

 

  new  fight  in  the halls,  between the  Elves and  the Dwarves,       
  would  demand  its  removal  in  any case,  if Menegroth  were not 
  to appear a permanent shambles).                                       


137 

    But  the  problem  remained:   how  did   the  gold   come  to   
  Doriath? It was an essential idea that  Hurin, destroyed  by what      
  he had seen (or by  what Morgoth  allowed him  to see)  and tor- 
  mented  by  bitterness and  grief, should  cast the  treasure of       
  Nargothrond at Thingol's feet in a gesture  of supreme  scorn of       
  the craven and greedy king, as he conceived him  to be;  hut the 
  new story in Q is obviously unsatisfactory -  it ruins  the ges-       
  ture, if Hurin  must get  the king  himself to  send for  the gold 
  with which he is  then to  be humiliate<i,  and it  is difficult 
  imagine the conversation between Hurin and Thingol when 
  Hurin first appeared  in Doriath,  announcing that  the treasure 
  had become available.                                                  
    However this may be,  the gold  comes to  Doriath, and  in all       
  versions Hurin departs: but now in  Q, to  drown himself  in the 
  western sea, without ever finding Morwen again.                        
    I  have  said in  commenting on  the corresponding  section in 
  S that I think it probable that my father had already decided to       
  simplify the involved story in the Tale of the  Nauglafring con-   
  cerning the gold of Nargothrond. In Q, which  is a  fully artic-   
  ulated narrative, if brief, the absence of Ufedhin can  be taken   
  as  a  clear  indication that  he had  been abandoned,  and with       
  him,  necessarily,  many of  the complexities  of the  king's deal     
  ings with the Dwarves. The  story has  become, then,  quite sim-       
  ple.  Thingol  desires  the  unwrought  gold  brought  by  Hurin to    
  be  worked;  he  sends for  the greatest  craftsmen on  earth, the     
  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost;  and  they  coming  desire the     
  treasure for themselves, the Silmaril also, and  plot to  gain it.     
  The argument that they use -  that the  treasure belonged  in right    
  to the Dwarves, since  it was  taken from  Mim -  reappears from       
  the Tale of the Nauglafring, where it occurs  in a  different con-      
  text  (II.  230:  an  argument  used  by  Naugladur lord  of Nogrod    
  to support his intention to attack Tinwelint).                         
    The  relative  wealth   or  otherwise   of  Thingol   has  not       
  touched on in Q, but his riches are recounted in  the Lay  of the      
  Children  of  Hurin  (see  III.  26)  and in  the Lay  of Leithian 
  (III. 160 - 1); and this is no doubt the force of the  word 'even' 

 

  in 'Then the  enchantment of  the accursed  dragon gold  began to             
  fall even upon the king of Doriath.'                                          
    In  S  the  king  drives  the  Dwarves  away  without  any pay-             
  ment; there is no mention of any  strife at  this point,  and one             
  would  think  that  even  the   most  severe   compression  could             
  hardly have avoided  mentioning it.  But in  Q the  narrative now             
  takes a quite different turn. Thingol  'scanted his  promised re-             
  ward',  and  this  led to  fighting in  the Thousand  Caves, with             
  many  slain  on  both sides;  and 'the  Mound of  Avarice', which             
  in the Tale of the Nauglafring  covered the  bodies of  the slain             
  Elves of Artanor  after the  battle with  the outlaws  of Hurin's             
  band, now  covers those  of the  Dwarves and  Elves; the  form of             
  the Elvish name  is changed  from Cum  an-Idrisaith (II.  223) to             
  Cum-nan-Arasaith.                                                            
    As  in  S,  the  sack  of  Menegroth  by  the Dwarves  is still             
  treated in Q with the utmost brevity, and central features of the             
  story  in  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring do  not recur,  nor ever             
  would. But (in addition to the loss of  Ufedhin) it  seems likely             
  that the 'great host'  of Orcs,  paid and  armed by  Naugladur of             
  Nogrod  (II.  230),  would  by  now   have  been   abandoned.  Of             
  course the whole story arose in  terms of,  and continues  to de-             
  pend  on,  the hostile  view of  the Dwarves  which is  so promi-             
  nent in the early writings.                                                   
    The  much  emended  geographical   passage  that   follows  now             
  in Q is best understood in relation  to the  first 'Silmarillion'             
  map, and I  postpone discussion  of the  rivers of  Ossiriand and             
  the Dwarf-road to Chapter IV, pp. 283ff. It  is sufficient  to no-             
  tice here that the courses of the six  tributary rivers  of Gelion             
  (here  called  Ascar,*  before  emendation to  Flend and  then to             
  Gelion,  note  3) are  drawn on  that map  in precisely  the same             
  form  as they  have on  that published  in The  Silmarillion, and             
  the first  map  names them  in order  of the  original emendation             


138 

  to  Q  (note  4)  before  that was  itself changed:  i.e., Ascar,             
  Thalos, Duilwen, Loeglin, Brilthor, Adurant.                                  
    It  is  now  made  explicit  that  it  was  Melian  who  warned             
                                                                               
  (* It seems probable that the first two occurrences of Ascar in  this section 
  were mere slips, for Flend (> Gelion). At the third  occurrence the  name is 
  used, as it is on the map, for the northernmost of the rivers coming down out 
  of the Blue Mountains, afterwards renamed Rahlorion (> Rathloriel).)          

 

             
                                                                      
 Beren  of  the  approach  of  the Dwarves  (see p.  75); and  the re- 
 moval  of  the  Land  of  the  Dead  that  Live  from  'the  woods of 
 Doriath  and  the  Hunters'  Wold,  west  of  Nargothrond',  where it 
 is  still  placed in  S ($10),  to Assariad  (Ossiriand) in  the East 
 makes  the  interception  of  the  Dwarves   far  simpler   and  more 
 natural:  the  Stony  Ford  (which  goes  back  to  the  Tale  of the 
 Nauglafring  and  is  there  called  Sarnathrod)  now  lies   on  the 
 river  that bounds  that very  land. The  geographical shift  and de- 
 velopment  has  made  the  whole  organisation  of  the   story  here 
 much easier.                                                          
  Beren's  people  now  at   last  become   'the  Green   Elves'  (see 
 p.  74);  but the  story of  the ambush  at the  ford is  passed over 
 in  Q as  sketchily as  it was  in S:  there is  now no  mention even 
 of  the  taking  of  the  Nauglafring  (>  Nauglamir) from  the slain 
 king.  The  story  of  the  drowning  of  the  treasure  remains much 
 the  same  as  in  S,  but  there are  suggestions of  wider implica- 
 tions  in  the  wearing  of  the  Nauglafring: that  the Land  of the 
 Dead  that  Live became  itself so  fruitful and  so fair  because of 
 the  presence  of  Luthien  wearing  the  Silmaril.  This  passage is 
 retained  almost  word  for  word  in The  Silmarillion (p.  235). It 
 is  clearly  to be  associated with  a later  passage, found  both in 
 Q  (p.  182)  and  in  The  Silmarillion (p.  247), where  the people 
 dwelling  at  the  Havens  of  Sirion after  the  fall   of  Gondolin 
 would  not  surrender  the  Silmaril  to   the  Feanorians   'for  it 
 seemed  to  them  that  in  the  Silmaril  lay  the  healing  and the 
 blessing  that  had  come  upon  their houses  and their  ships'. But 
 the  Silmaril  was  cursed  (and  this   may  seem   a  sufficiently 
 strange   conception),   and   Melian   warned   Beren   and  Luthien 
 against it. In Q it is not said, as it is in S, that the Silmaril was 
 kept  secretly  by  Beren,  merely  that  he  and  Luthien 'retained' 
 it.  In  both  texts the  fading of  Luthien follows  immediately; but 
 while  Q  again  makes  no  actual  connection  (see  p. 75)  the very 
 ordering  of  its  sentences  suggests  that  such  a  connection was 
 there:  'the  Land  of the  Dead that  Live became  like a  vision of 
 the  land  of  the  Gods...  Yet  Melian  warned  them  ever   of the 
 curse...  yet  the  Silmaril  they  retained. And  in time  the brief 
 hour  of  the  loveliness  of  the land  of Rathlorion  departed. For 
 Luthien faded as Mandos had spoken...'                                
  The  statements  made  in  S$$10  and  14  on  the  fates  of  Beren 

 

  and Luthien have been discussed at  some length  (pp. 76  - 77).                
  When we turn to Q,  we find  that in  the earlier  passage ($10,                
  where  the  first  death  of Beren  and Luthien's  pleading with                
  Mandos is recounted), while there is mention  of songs  that say                
  that Luthien was borne living to Valinor by Thorndor,  these are                
  discounted, and 'it has long been said  that Luthien  failed and                
  faded swiftly and  vanished from  the earth',  and thus  came to                
  Mandos: she had died, as Elves might die, of grief (cf.  the old                
  Tale of Tinuviel, II. 40).  And the  dispensation of  Mandos ex-                
  acted  that  'Luthien should  become mortal  even as  her lover,                
  and should leave the  earth once  more in  the manner  of mortal                
  women'.  This  seems  precise:  it  can  surely  only  mean that                
  Luthien had become, not an Elf  with a  peculiar destiny,  but a                
  mortal woman. Her nature had changed.*                                          
    Yet  Q  retains  the  conception  in  the  present  passage of                
  Luthien's fading  - her  second fading.  I think  it can  now be                
  seen why my father wrote an X against  this sentence  (note 12);                
  and note also the marginal addition at this point: 'Yet  it hath                


139 

  been  sung  that  Luthien  alone  of  Elves  hath  been numbered                
  among  our  race,'  and  goeth whither  we go  to a  fate beyond                
  the world' (cf. The  Silmarillion p.  236: 'Beren  Erchamion and                
  Luthien Tinuviel had  died indeed,  and gone  where go  the race                
  of Men to a fate beyond the world').                                            
    Coming lastly to the  story of  Dior and  the end  of Doriath,                
  it is now  Celegorm, Curufin,  and Cranthir  who were  slain, as                
  in The Silmarillion (p. 236); and by a late addition to the text                
  (note  14)  Dior  has  sons,  Eldun and  Elrun, who  were killed                
  with  their  father. In  The Silmarillion  they were  Elured and                
  Elurin, who were left by the servants of  Celegorm to  starve in                
  the forest.                                                                     
                                                                                 
  (*The  further  judgement  of  Mandos  in  $10,  that  'in recompense'  he 'gave 
  to Beren and Luthien thereafter a long span of life and joy', seems at variance 
  with what is implied here in Q. See III. 125.                                   
   + 'our race': the Quenta, according to its title (pp. 92 - 3), was 'drawn from 
  the Book of Lost Tales which Eriol of Leithien wrote'.)                          

 

                                  15.                                 
                                                                     
   In this version of the story of Eol and Isfin it is told  that Eol 
 'was  of  gloomy mood,  and had  deserted the  hosts ere  the battle 
 [of  Unnumbered  Tears]'.  Nothing  has  been  said  before  of  how 
 Eol  came  to  be  dwelling in  the terrible  forest (and  later his 
 earlier   history   was   to   be   wholly   changed    again:   The 
 Silmarillion p. 132).                                                
                                                                     
   The general description of the plain and city of Gondolin in       
 Q is obviously closely based on S, and shows little more than        
 stylistic development. But Thorndor is here said to have dwelt       
 on Thangorodrim before he moved his eyries to the Encircling         
 Mountains (see p. 80); and there is an interesting reference to           
 the original intention of the people of Gondolin to go to war        
 again when the time was ripe. The most important alteration          
 here is the pencilled addition (note 5), taken up into the Q II      
 text, telling that Turgon after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears       
 sent at times Elves down Sirion to the sea, where they built a       
 small haven and set sail, in vain, for Valinor. This is the forerun- 
 ner of the passage in The Silmarillion (p. 159), where however       
 the building of ships by the Gondolindrim and the setting sail       
 for Valinor 'to ask for pardon and aid of the Valar' is placed af- 
 ter the Dagor Bragollach and the breaking of the Leaguer of          
 Angband (for the foundation of Gondolin took place centuries         
 before the Battle of Unnumbered Tears). But in The Silmarillion      
 (p. 196) there was also a further attempt by Turgon to reach         
 Valinor in the time after the great battle, when Cirdan of the       
 Falas built for him seven ships, of which the only survivor was      
 Voronwe. The origin of this idea of the fruitless voyages of the 
 Gondolindrim is to be found in the tale of The Fall of Gondolin      
 (II. 162), where Ulmo by the mouth of Tuor counselled Turgon         
 to make such voyages, and Turgon replied that he had done so         
 'for years untold', and would do so now no more.                     
   In the replacement text Q II (pp. 166 - 68), where the old         
 story of the foundation of Gondolin is still present, there is       
 very little to record in narrative development, except that the 
 sending of Elves to Sirion's mouth and the sailing of ships          
 from a secret haven is now incorporated in the text; and it is       
 said that as the years drew on these sailings ceased and the ha- 

 

    Maps to          
                    
 THE SHAPING 
                    
       OF          
   MIDDLE-EARTH. 
                    
  J. R. R. TOLKIEN. 

 


140 

  ven  was  abandoned.  It  is  now  explained  why  it   was  that            
  Thorndor (> Thorondor) moved his eyries from Thangorodrim.                   
    The passage of time is left entirely vague in these narratives.            
  There  is no  indication of  how many  years elapsed  between the            
  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears  or its  immediate aftermath  - when            
  in  the  first  years  of  Gondolin  Turgon was trying to  get his            
  messages  to  Valinor -  and the  coming of  Tuor, by  which time            
  the  haven  at  Sirion's  mouth  was  desolate, none  could enter            
  Goldolin from the  outside world,  and neither  the king  nor the            
  most part of his  people wished  any more  for return  to Valinor            
  (p. 171). But the change  in feeling  in Gondolin  - and  all the            
  mighty  works of  levelling and  tunnelling -  must imply  a long            
  lapse of time ('as the years drew on', pp.  165, 168).  This con-            
  ception goes back to the original  Fall of  Gondolin (see  my re-            
  marks, II. 208); but at that time Tuor  had no  associations that            
  would  tie  him  into  a  chronological  framework. Already  in S            
  ($16), however,  Huor, brother  of Hurin,  had become  Tuor's fa-            
  ther,  and  Huor  was slain  in the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears.            
  Clearly  there  was  a  major  narrative-chronological difficulty            
  lurking here,  and it  was not  long before  my father  moved the            
  founding of Gondolin {and with it that of  Nargothrond) to  a far            
  earlier point in the history. Unhappily, as I have  mentioned be-            
  fore (II. 208, footnote), the  Quenta account  was the  last that            
  my  father  ever  wrote  of  the  story  of Gondolin  from Tuor's            
  coming  to  its  destruction; and  therefore, though  the revised            
  chronological  structure  is perfectly  clear, the  latest actual            
  formed  narrative  retains  the  old  story  of  the  founding of            
  Gondolin  after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears.  Against the            
  words  in the  Q II  replacement 'For  Turgon deemed,  when first            
  they came into  that vale  after the  dreadful battle'  my father            
  wrote an X (note 3); but in all the years that followed  he never            
  turned to it again.*                                                         
    The name  Eryd-Lomin occurs  for the  first time+ in the  Q II            
                                                                              
  (*The passage in The Silmarillion (p. 240) is an editorial attempt to use the 
  old narrative within the later structure.                                    
    +For the first time in the narrative texts. The actual first occurrence is 
  probably in the caption to my father's painting of  Tol Sirion  (Pictures by 
  J. R. R. Tolkien no. 36) of July 1928, which though it cannot be made out in 
  the reproduction reads: 'The Vale of  Sirion, looking  upon Dor-na-Fauglith,) 
 with Eryd Lomin (the Shadowy Mountains) on the left and the eaves of Taur- 
 na-Fuin on the right.')                                                     

 

 replacement text, but its  reference is  to the  Mountains of              
 Shadow fencing Hithlum, and it was later emended (note  1) to              
 Eredwethion  (Ered  Wethrin  in  The Silmarillion).  The name              
 Eryd-Lomin did at  this time  mean 'Shadowy  Mountains', just              
 as Dor-lomin meant 'Land of Shadows' (see I. 112, and  I. 255              
 entry  Hisilome).  Subsequently  Eryd-Lomin,  Ered  Lomin was              
 changed  both  in  meaning  ('Shadowy Mountains'  to 'Echoing              
 Mountains', with lom 'echo', as also  in Dor-lomin  'Land of              
 Echoes') and in application, becoming the name of the coastal              
 range to the west of Hithlum.                                              
                                                                           
                                    16.                                     
                                                                           
   At  the  beginning  of  this  section  we  find  the  first  beginnings 
 of  the  later  story  of  the  coming  of   Isfin and   Meglin  (Aredhel 
 and  Maeglin)  to  Gondolin,  rather  than  (as  still  in  S)  the send- 
 ing  of  Meglin  by  his  mother;  Eol  was  lost  in  Taur-na-Fuin,  and 
 his  wife  and  son  came  to   Gondolin  in   his  absence.   There  was 
 much further development to come (the story of Maeglin in                  
 The Silmarillion is one of the latest elements in the book).               
   In  the  rewritten  passage  given  in  note  3 the  birth of  Tuor 'in 
 the  wild'  appears  (see  p.  81);  the  implication  is  no  doubt that 
 as in The Silmarillion (p. 198) and with more detail in the                
 'later  Tuor'  (Unfinished  Tales  p.  17)  he  was  born  in  the  wilds 
 of  Hithlum,  and  that  it  was  after  his  birth  that Rian  went east 
 to the Hill of Slain (in the rough rewriting of the passage in             


141 

 Q  I  now  first  given  an  Elvish  name,  Amon   Dengin).  But   it  is 
 odd that in the rewriting Tuor's servitude among 'the faithless            
 Men', found in S and in Q as first written, is excluded.                   
   In the account of Tuor's flight from Hithlum the name of the             
 Rainbow  Cleft  as  originally  written  was  Cris-Ilfing  (in  the  tale 
 of  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  it  was   Cris  Ilbranteloth   or  Glorfalc), 
 emended   to   Kirith   Helvin   (Cirith   Ninniach   in   The  Silmaril- 
 lion).                                                                     
   Tuor's  journey   remains  unchanged.   It  was   already  said   in  S 
 that  Bronweg  'had  once  been  in  Gondolin',  now it  is added  that  
 he   had   escaped   from   Angband,   and   had  reached   Sirion  after 
                                                                           
  long  wanderings  in  the  East.  That  he had  been in  Angband ap- 
  pears  in  fact  already  in  the  Lay  of  the  Fall   of  Gondolin 
  (III. 148), and is implied in the Tale (II. 156 - 7). The story of his 
  lone survival from the last of the  ships sent  out on  Turgon's or- 
  ders  had  not  yet  arisen;  and  his  escape  from  Angband  makes 
  him a rather  obvious parallel  to Flinding  (Gwindor), or  at least 
  points  a general  likeness between  the stories  of Turin  and Tuor 
  at  this  point. In  each case  a Man  is guided  by an  Elf escaped 
  from  Angband to  the hidden  city of  which the  Elf was  a citizen 
  in the past. - The visitation of Ulmo to  Tuor 'as  he stood  in the 
  long  grass at  evening' in  the Land  of Willows  goes back  to the 
  Tale, where he stood  'knee-deep in  the grass' (II. 155).  This was 
  an  essential  element  never abandoned;  see II.  205. The  song of 
  Tuor  that he  made for  his son  Earendel is  extant, and  is given 
  in Appendix 2 to this chapter (p. 262).                              
    Ulmo's  instructions  to  Tuor  in  Q  remain  the  same as  in S; 
  but  in  the  Q  II  replacement  there  are  important differences. 
  Here,  the  great   war  between   Gondolin  and   Angband  foreseen 
  by  Ulmo  is  given  a  larger  scope,  and  its  succesful  outcome 
  made  to  seem  more  plausible:  Tuor's  errand  to  Hithlum, where 
  he  was  to  draw  the ('evil'  and 'faithless')  Men of  Hithlum (a 
  land  full  of  Morgoth's  spies)  into alliance  with the  Elves, a 
  task  it  would  seem  of  the  utmost  hopelessness,  is  now aban- 
  doned,  and  Tuor  is to  journey into  the East  and rouse  the new 
  nations  of  Men;  the  feud with  the Feanorians  is to  be healed. 
  But  in  the  contrary  case,  Ulmo  no  longer  makes  any  promise 
  to  aid  the  people of  Gondolin in  the building  of a  fleet. His 
  foreknowledge  of  the   approaching  doom   of  Gondolin   is  made 
  progressively  less  precise:  in  S  he  knows  that  it  will come 
  through  Meglin  in  seven (>  twelve) years,  in Q  I that  it will 
  come  in  twelve  years,  but  without  mention of  Meglin, in  Q II 
  only that  it will  come before  many years  are passed,  if nothing 
  is done.                                                             
    In the story of  Meglin's treachery  in Q  it is  expressly stated 
  (as it is not in S, though it is almost  certainly implied)  that he 
  revealed  the  actual  situation  of  Gondolin,  of   which  Morgoth 
  was until then ignorant.                                             
    There  are  strong  suggestions  in  this compressed  account that 
  Gondolin's  rich  heraldry  of  houses  and  emblems  was   only  in 

 

  abeyance,   not   abandoned.    The   seven    names   of    Gondolin   are 
  referred   to,   though   not   given,  and   Ecthelion  of   the  Fountain 
  and   Glorfindel   of   the  House   of  the   Golden  Flower   are  named. 
  Indeed   so   many   old  features   reappear  -   the  Gates   of  Summer, 
  the  'death  of  Rog  without  the  walls'*  -  that   it  does   not  need 
  the  reference  in  the  text  to  The  Fall  of  Gondolin  to  show  that 
  my  father  had  the  Tale  very  fully  in  mind.  In  the   reference  to 
  the   'devising'   (rather   than   'breeding')    of   new    dragons   by 
  Morgoth  for  the  assault  on  the  city  there   is  even   a  suggestion 
  of   the   (apparently)   inanimate   constructions   of  the   Tale  (see 
  II. 213).                                                                   
    The  relation   between  the   present  shor;   version  of   the  escape 
  of   the   fugitives   and   the   ambush    in   Cristhorn    (>   Kirith- 
  thoronath),    which    is   effectively    that   in    The   Silmarillion 
  (p.  243),  and  that  in  the Tale  has been  discussed in  II. 213  - 14. 
  The   absence   from   The   Silmarillion   of   the  fugitives   who  went 
  to  the   Way  of   Escape  and   were  there   destroyed  by   the  dragon 


142 

  lying  in  wait,  an  element  present  in  S  and Q,  is due  to editorial 
  excision,  based  on  evidence  in  a   much  later   text  that   the  old 
  entrance  to  Gondolin  had  been  blocked  up.  That   text  is   the  ba- 
  sis  for  the  passage  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  228)  where  Hurin  af- 
  ter   his   release   from   Thangorodrim   came   to   the  feet   of  the 
  Encircling Mountains:                                                       
                                                                             
    he looked about him with little hope, standing at the foot of            
    a great fall of stones beneath a shee! rock-wall; and  he knew            
    not that this was all that was now left to see of the  old Way            
    of  Escape: the  Dry River  was blocked,  and the  arched gate            
    was buried.                                                               
                                                                             
  The sentence in The Silmarillion p. 240 'Therefore in that time             
  the very entrance to the  hidden door  in the  Encircling Moun-             
  tains was caused to be blocked up' was an editorial addition.                
    In Q reappears from the Tale the sojourn of the  survivors of             
  Gondolin in the Land of Willows,  and the  return of  the 'sea-             
  longing'  to Tuor,  leading to  the departure  from Nan-Tathrin             
  down Sirion to the Sea.                                                     
                                                                             
  (*For the absence of Rog from the passage in The Silmarillion (p. 242) see 
    II. 211, second footnote.)                                                

 

                                              
                                                                   
  Lastly may  be noticed  the description  of Idril  Celebrindal in 
 Q  II  (p, 177)  - tall,  'well nigh  of warrior's  stature', with 
 golden hair: the prototype  of Galadriel  (see especially  the de- 
 scription of her in Unfinished Tales pp. 229 - 30),               
                                                                   
                                17.                                 
                                                                   
  In the original  Q text  in this  section the  structure of  S is 
 closely  followed, and  in many  respects the  story is  still un- 
 changed where change was very soon to take place.                  
  All  trace  of  Ulmo's  urging Earendel  to undertake  the voyage 
 to Valinor  has disappeared  (see S$17  note 3);  but it  is still 
 Ulmo's  'grievous  words'  to the  Valar that  lead to  the coming 
 forth  of  the  Sons  of  the  Valar  against  Morgoth,  and still 
 Earendel 'came too late to bring  messages to  the Elves,  for the 
 Elves  had  gone' (cf.  Q$6: 'he  came too  late'). There  now ap- 
 pears,  on the  other hand,  Earendel's wish  to bring  'a message 
 to  the  Gods  and  Elves  of  the  West,  that should  move their 
 hearts to pity on  the world',  even though,  when he  came, there 
 were none in Kor to  whom to  deliver it.  But the  ultimate story 
 is noted on the text in pencil (note 1).                           
  In  the  account of  the host  that came  from Valinor  Fionwe is 
 still the son of Tulkas (see p. 82};  but now  none of  the Teleri 
 leave Valinor, while on  the other  hand there  is mention  of the 
 Gnomes   who   had   not  left   Valinor  at   the  time   of  the 
 Rebellion  - cf.  the earlier  passage in  Q ($5):  'Some remained 
 behind... It was long ere  they came  back into  this tale  of the 
 wars and wanderings of their people.'                              
  Bronweg  is  still  present  as  in  S  living alone  at Sirion's 
 mouth after the attack by the Feanorians, and he still  sails with 
 Earendel  on  the  second  voyage  of  Wingelot that  brought them 
 to Kor. Earendel still at this point in the story builds the Tower 
 of Seabirds; his ship is raised, as in S, on  the wings  of birds, 
 as he  searches for  Elwing from  the sky,  whence he  is hunted 
 by  the  Moon  and  wanders  over  the earth  as a  fugitive star. 
 Elwing still casts the Silmaril into the sea  and leaps  after it, 
 taking  the  form of  a seabird  to seek  Earendel 'about  all the 
 shores  of  the  world'.  Minor  developments  are  the dissension 
 among  the  Feanorians, so  that some  stood aside  and others 
 aided Elwing; the deaths  of Damrod  and Diriel  (see p.  84); the 

 

                                                                              
                                                                                  


143 

  explanation of Maidros' pity for the child Elrond ('for his heart                
  was sick and weary with the  burden of  the dreadful  oath'); and                
  the  description  of  Wingelot.  The name  of Tuor's  ship Earame                
  is translated 'Eagle's Pinion' (the old explanation of  the name,                
  when it was  Earendel's ship),  not 'Sea-wing'  (see p.  83). The                
  passage in S concerning the  choice of  Elrond Halfelven  is here                
  omitted, but the matter reappears in $18.                                        
                                                                                  
    With this section the rewriting of Q (as  'Q II')  becomes con-                
  tinuous to the end of the work, and the original text ('Q I') in                
  fact gives out before the end. Since  substantial stretches  of Q                
  I  remain unchanged  in Q  II, I  do not  suppose that  much time                
  elapsed between them; but  certain major  new strokes  are intro-                
  duced into the legend in the rewriting.                                          
    These  major developments  in the  present section  are, first,                
  that Ulmo's words to the Valar  did not  achieve the  war against                
  Morgoth  ('Manwe  moved  not');  second,  that  Elwing,  borne up                
  as  a  seabird,  bore  the Silmaril  on her  breast, and  came to                
  Earendel, returning from his  first voyage  in Wingelot:  so that                
  the  Silmaril  of  Beren  was  not lost,  but became  the Evening                
  Star; and third, that Earendel, voyaging to Valinor with Elwing,                
  came before the Valar, and it was  his 'embassy  of the  two kin-                
  dreds' that led to the assault on Morgoth.*                                      
    But there are also many  changes of  a less  structural charac-                
  ter in Q II, as: Earendel's earlier voyages  about the  shores of                
  the  Outer  Lands before  he built  Wingelot; his  warning dreams                
  to return in haste to the Mouths  of Sirion,  which in  the event                
  he  never  came  back  to,  being  intercepted  by the  coming of                
  Elwing  as  a  seabird  and  her  tidings  of  what  had happened                
  there  in  his  absence  -  hence  the  disappearance  of Bronweg                
  from the story; the healing power of the  Silmaril on  the people                
  of  Sirion  (see  p.  230): the  great light  of the  Silmaril as                
  Wingelot  approached Valinor,  and the  suggestion that  it was                
  the power  of the  jewel that  brought the  ship through  the en-                
  chantmerts  and  the  shadows;  Earendel's  refusal to  allow any                
  of those that travelled with him to come  with him  into Valinor;                
  the new explanation of the desertion  of Tun  upon Kor  (for ',he                
                                                                                  
  (*The first appearance of this central idea is in a hasty pencilled note to Q I 
  (note 1): 'Make Earendel move the Gods.')                                        

 

  story still endured that the city of the Elves  was empty  of its                  
  inhabitants   when   Earendel  came   there);  the   greeting  of                  
  Earendel  by  Fionwe  (now  again  the  son  of  Manwe)   as  the                  
  Morning  and  Evening  Star;  the  manning by  the Teleri  of the                  
  ships  that  bore  the  hosts of  the West;  and the  sighting of                  
  the Silmaril  in the  sky by  Maidros and  Maglor and  the people                  
  of the Outer Lands.                                                                
    By  subsequent  emendation  to  Q  II  some   further  elements                  
  enter. To Tuor is ascribed a fate (note 3) hardly  less astonish-                  
  ing  than  that of  his cousin  Turin Turambar.  Elrond's brother                  
  Elros appears (notes  4 and  9); and  Maglor takes  over Maidros'                  
  role as their saviour, and as the less ruthless and single-minded                  
  of the two brothers (note 10;  see the  commentary on  $18). Tne                  
  addition in note 19  stating that  the leader  of the  Gnomes who                  
  had  never  departed  from Valinor  was Ingwiel  son of  Ingwe is                  
  at first sight surprising: one would expect Finrod  (> Finarfin),                  
  as in The Silmarillion (p. 251). I think however that  this addi-                  
  tion  was  imperfectly  accommodated  to  the  text:  the meaning                  
  intended  was  that  Ingwiel  was  the chief  of the  Quendi (the                  
  Light-elves,  the  Vanyar)  among  whom  the  Gnomes  of  Valinor                  
  marched.* In a revision to Q$2 (note 6)  the original  text, say-                  
  ing  that  Ingwe  never  came  back into  the Outer  Lands 'until                  
  these  tales were  near their  end', was  changed to  a statement                  
  that  he  never  returned.  Ingwiel  replaces  Ingil son  of Inwe                  
  of the Lost Tales, who built Ingil's Tower in Tol Eressea (I. 16)                  
  after his return from the Great Lands.                                             
    As Q II was first written                                                        
                                                                                    


144 

    Earendel was their guide [i e. of the fleet of the hosts of                      
    Valinor];  but  the  Gods  would not  suffer him  to return                      
    again,+ and he built him a white tower upon the confines of                      
                                                                                    
   (*In the final version of this passage my father  noticed the  (apparent) error, 
    and changed Ingwiel son  of Ingwe  to Finarfin  son of  Finwe (hence  the read- 
    ing in The Silmarillion). The result is that whereas in Q II only the  leader of 
    !he First Kindred is named, Ingwiel, in the final version only the leader of the 
    Noldor of Valinor is named, Finarfin; but the one should not, I think,  have re- 
    placed    the    other    -    rather    both    should    have    been   named. 
    + Cf. the letter of 1967 cited in II.  265: 'Earendil,  being in  part descended 
    from Men, was not allowed to set foot on Earth again.')                        

 

                                                                            
                                                                               
 the outer world in  the Northern  regions of  the Sundering                    
 Seas, and there all the sea-birds of the earth at times re-                    
 paired.                                                                        
                                                                               
 The  Tower   of  Seabirds   thus  survives   in  the   same  place   in  the 
 narrative  as  in  S  and  Q,   where  Earendel   builds  the   tower  after 
 his  fruitless  visit  to  Kor. At  the end  of this  section in  S Earendel 
                                                                               
 sails by the aid of [the seabirds'] wings even over the airs                   
 in search of Elwing, but is scorched by the Sun,  and hunted                   
 from the sky by the Moon, and  for a  long while  he wanders                   
 the sky as a fugitive star.                                                    
                                                                               
 Virtually the same is said at the end of the section  in Q  I. In              
 Q  II, however,  as first  written, Elwing  was with  Earendel at              
 this time,* in the form of  a bird,  and it  was she  who devised              
 wings for his ship, so that 'it was lifted  even into  the oceans              
 of the air'.                                                                   
 In  S  and Q  I Earendel  does not  yet bear  a Silmaril  when he              
 wanders the sky 'as a fugitive star' (for  the Silmaril  of Beren              
 is drowned with the Nauglafring, and the others are still in the              
 Iron Crown of Morgoth); whereas in Q II it is  at this  time that              
 the Silmaril appears in the sky and gives hope  to the  people of              
 the Outer Lands.                                                               
 With  the  revision  to Q  II given  in note  20 enters  the idea              
 that it was the  Gods themselves  who set  Earendel and  his ship              
 in the sky. It is now Elwing  who builds  the Tower  of Seabirds,              
 devising wings for herself in order to try to reach him, in vain;              
 and they are sundered till the end  of the  world. This  no doubt              
 goes with the revision to Q  II given  in note  14: 'And  he bade              
 farewell  to  all  whom  he loved  upon the  last shore,  and was              
 taken from them for ever.'                                                     
 In  The  Silmarillion  the  element  of  a  small  ship's company              
 remains:  the  three  mariners  Falathar, Erellont,  and Aerandir              
 (p. 248). These,  and Elwing,  Earendil refused  to allow  to set              
                                                                               
 (*It is not actually said in Q II that Elwing returned to Earendel  after being 
 bidden by him to remain behind  when he  landed on  'the immortal  shores' and 
 went to Kor; but it is evident that she did, from her having devised wings for 
 his ship.)                                                                      

 

  foot  on  the  shore of  Aman; but  Elwing leapt  into the  sea and 
  ran  to  him,  saying:  'Then  would  our  paths  be  sundered  for 
  ever.'  There  Earendil  and  Elwing  'bade  farewell  to  the com- 
  panions  of  their  voyage,  and  were taken  from them  for ever', 
  but  Elwing  did  not  even  so  accompany  Elendil to  Tirion. She 
  sojourned  among  the  Teleri  of  Alqualonde,  and  Earendil  came 
  to her there after he  had 'delivered  the errand  of the  Two Kin- 
  dreds'  before the  Valar; and  they went  then together  to Valmar 
  and  heard  Manwe  s  decree,  and  the  choice  of  fate  that was 
  given to them and to their children.                               
    A  curious point  arises in  the account  in Q  II of  the voyage 
  of  Earendel  and  Elwing  that  brought  them  to  the   coast  of 
  Valinor.  Whereas  in Q  I it  is said  that Earendel  'found again 


145 

  the  Lonely  Isle,  and  the  Shadowy  Seas',  in  Q II  'they came 
  into  the  Shadowy  Seas  and  passed   their  shadows;   and  they 
  looked  upon  the  Lonely  Isle...'  This  suggests that  the Shad- 
  owy  Seas  had  become  a  region  of  the Great  Sea lying  to the 
  east  cf Tol  Eressea; and  the same  idea seems  to be  present in 
  $6 both in S and in Q, for it is said there that  at the  Hiding of 
  Valinor  'the  Magic Isles  were... strung  across the  confines of 
  the  Shadowy  Seas,  before  the  Lonely  Isle  is  reached sailing 
  West'.  Quite different  is the  account in  the Lost  Tales, where 
  'beyond  Tol  Eressea  [lying  west  of  the  Magic  Isles]  is the 
  misty  wall  and  those  great  sea  glooms  beneath which  lie the 
  Shadowy  Seas'   (I.  125);   and  the   Shadowy  Seas   extend  to 
  the coasts of the western  land (I.  68). Conceivably,  this devel- 
  opment  is  related  to  the  changed  position  of  Tol  Eressea - 
  anchored  in,  the  Bay  of   Faerie  within   far  sight   of  the 
  Mountains  of  Valinor,  and  not  as  in  the  Lost Tales  in mid- 
  Ocean: a change that entered the geography in S$3.                 
    In  emendations  to  Q  II  the  Magic   Isles  become   the  En- 
  chanted Isles (note 11; see II. 324 - 5) and the Bay of  Faerie be- 
  comes   the   Bay   of   Elven-home  (note   12);  also   the  name 
  Earame  of  Tuor's  ship  becomes  Earrame,  with the  later inter- 
  pretation 'Sea-wing' (note 2).                                     
                                                                    
                                  18.                                
                                                                    
    There are several interesting developments in the story of        
  the Last Battle and its aftermath as told in the original Q I text 

 

  of this section. The very brief account in S is here  greatly ex- 
  panded,  and much  of the  final version  appears, if  still with 
  many differences(  notably  the absence of Earendel). That 
  Morgoth  had  been  bound  long  before  by  Tulkas in  the chain 
  Angainor  now  re-emerges from  the Lost  Tales (this  feature is 
  absent in Q$2; see pp. 86, 201).                                  
    The passage describing  the rending  of Beleriand  survives al- 
  most  unchanged  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  252), which  in fact 
  adds  nothing  else. There  is a  notable statement  (retained in 
  Q  II) that                                                       
                                                                   
    Men  fled  away,  such  as  perished  not  in  the ruin  of those 
    days,  and  long  was  it  ere  they  came  back  over  the moun- 
    tains to where Beleriand  once had  been, and  not till  the tale 
    of those days had faded to an echo seldom heard.                
                                                                   
  I do not know certainly what this refers to (see below,  p. 244). 
  Unhappily  the  evidence  for the  development of  the conception 
  of the drowning of Beleriand is extremely  scanty. Later,  it was 
  only a small  region (Lindon)  that remained  above the  sea west 
  of  the  Blue  Mountains;  but  this  need not  by any  means yet 
  have been the case. It is also said in Q (again retained in Q II) 
  that                                                              
                                                                   
    there  was  a  mighty  building  of  ships on  the shores  of the 
    Western Sea, and most  upon the  great isles,  which in  the dis- 
    ruption   of   the   Northern   world   were  fashioned   of  old 
    Beleriand.                                                      
                                                                   
  Of the size and number of these  'great isles'  we are  not told. 
  On  one  of  my  father's  sketchmaps  made for  The Lord  of the 
  Rings there is the island of Himling, i.e. the summit of the Hill 
  of Himring, and also Tol Fuin, i.e. the highest part  of Taur-na- 
  Fuin (see Unfinished Tales pp. 13 - 14); and in  The Silmarillion 
  (p. 230) it is said that the stone of the  Children of  Hurin and 
  the  grave  of  Morwen  above  Cabed  Naeramarth  stands  on  Tol 
  Morwen  'alone  in  the  water  beyond the  new coasts  that were 
  made in the days of the  wrath of  the Valar'.  But it  seems ob- 
  vious that my father was at  this time  imagining far  larger is- 

 

                                                                          


146 

                                                                                 
 lands than these, since it was on them that the great fleets were                
 built at the end of  the War  of Wrath.  Luthien ()  Leithien) as                
 the land from which the Elves set sail,  named in  S $18  and ex-                
 plained  as  'Britain or  England', is  not named  in Q;  but the                
 words that  follow in  S: 'Thence  they ever  still from  time to                
 time set sail leaving the world  ere they  fade', are  clearly re-                
 flected in Q:                                                                    
                                                                                 
   Yet not all returned, and some lingered many  an age  in the                   
   West and  North, and  especially in  the Western  Isles. Yet                   
   ever  as  the ages  drew on  and the  Elf-folk faded  on the                   
   Earth, they would  still set  sail at  eve from  our Western                   
   shores; as still they do, when now there linger few anywhere                   
   of the lonely companies.                                                       
                                                                                 
 The  relation  between  these  passages  strongly suggests  that the             
 'Western  Isles'  were the  British Isles,*  and that  England still             
 had  a place  in the  actual mythological  geography, as  is explic-             
 itly so in  S. In  this connection  the opening  of AElfwine  of En-             
 giand, in the final text AElfwine II (II. 312 - 13), is interesting:             
                                                                                 
   There was a land called England, and it was an island  of the                  
   West, and before it  was broken  in the  warfare of  the Gods                  
   it  was  westernmost of  all the  Northern lands,  and looked                  
   upon the Great Sea that Men of old  called Garsecg;  but that                  
   part that was broken was  called Ireland  and many  names be-                  
   sides, and its dwellers come not into these tales.                             
      All that land the Elves named Luthien and do so yet. In                  
   Luthien alone dwelt still the  most part  of the  Fading Com-                  
   panies, the Holy Fairies that have not  yet sailed  away from                  
   the world,  beyond the  horizon of  Men's knowledge,  to the                  
   Lonely Island, or even to  the Hill  of Tun  upon the  Bay of                  
   Faery that washes the western  shores of  the kingdom  of the                  
   Gods.                                                                          
                                                                                 
  (*This may seem to be rendered  less likely  by the  form of  the passage  in Q 
   II, where the first sentence is expanded: 'and especially in the western isles 
   and the lands of Leithien'. But I do not think that this phrase need  be taken 
   too precisely, and believe that the equation holds.)                          

 

  It  is  possible,  as  I suggested  (II. 323  - 4),  that this  passage refers 
  to  the  cataclysm,  and  its   aftermath,  that   is  otherwise   first  men- 
  tioned  in  S  $18.  AElfwine  II  cannot   be  dated,   but  AElfwine   I  on 
  which   it   was   based   was   probably   written  in   1920  or   not  much 
  later.  It  is  also  conceivable,  if  no  more,  that  the  meaning  of  the 
  words   in   Q,   that   it   was   long   before    Men   came    back   over 
  the   mountains   to   where   Beleriand   once  had   been,  refers   to  the 
  bloody   invasions   of   England   in  later   days  described   in  AElfwine 
  II;  for  there  is  very  little  in  that  text that  cannot be  readily ac- 
  commodated   to   the   present   passage   in   S  and   Q,  with   the  pic- 
  ture   of    the   fading    Elves   of    Luthien   'leaving    our   Western 
  shores'.*  But  a  serious  difficulty  with  this  idea  lies  in   the  com- 
  ing   of   Men   'over   the   mountains'   to   where   Beleriand   once  had 
  been.                                                                          
    Certainly   the   most   remarkable,   even   startling,   feature   of  the 
  aftermath  of  the  Last  Battle  in  Q  (I)  is   the  statement   that  when 
  Fionwe     marched     through    the     lands    summoning     the    Gnomes 
  and   the   Dark-elves   to   leave   the   Outer  Lands,   the  Men   of  the 
  Houses   of   Hador   and   Beor   were   'suffered   to   depart,   if   they 
  would'.   But   only  Elrond   was  left;   and  of   his  choice,   as  Half- 
  elven,  the  same   is  told   as  in   S  $17.   The  implications   of  this 
  passage  are  puzzling.  It   is  obvious   that  'the   race  of   Hador  and 
  Beor'    means    those    directly   descended    from   Hador    and   Beor; 
  afterwards     the     conception    of     these    Houses     became    much 
  enlarged   -   they   became   clans.   But  since   of  the   direct  descen- 
  dants   only   Elrond   was  left,   what  does   this  permission   mean?  Is 
  it  a   (very  curious)   way  of   offering  the   choice  of   departure  to 
  the   Half-elven,   if   he   (they)  wished?   -  because   the  Half-elven 


147 

  had   only   come  into   existence  in   the  Houses   of  Hador   and  Beor. 
                                                                                
  (*Two small likenesses may be noticed: in AElfwine  11 the  ships of  the Elves 
  weigh anchor from the western haven 'at eve' (II. 315), as in Q; and with 'the 
  lonely companies' of Q cf. 'the Fading Companies' of AElfwine  II in  the pas- 
  sage cited above.                                                              
    A further attractive deduction, that  this was  the origin  of the  haven of 
  Belerion in  AElfwine of  England, the  western harbour  'whence the  Elves at 
  times set sail' (a survival of the old name Beleriand among  the Men  of later 
  days when its original reference was forgotten,  and 'the  tale of  those days 
  had faded to an echo seldom heard'), cannot be sustained: for AElfwine  11 was 
  certainly written long before  the earliest  occurrences of  Beleriand (rather 
  than Broseliand).)                                                              

 

  But this seems too  legalistic and  contorted to  be at  all proba- 
  ble.  Then does  it imply  that, if  there had  in fact  been other 
  descendants  -  if,  for  example,  Gundor  son  of  Hador  had had 
  children  -  they  would  have  been   permitted  to   depart?  And 
  what  then?  Would  they  have  ended  their  days  as  mortal  Men 
  on  Tol  Eressea?  The  permission  seems  very  obscure  on either 
  interpretation;  and  it  was  removed  from  Q II.  Nonetheless it 
  represents, as I think, the first germ of the  story of  the depar- 
  ture of the survivors of the Elf-friends to Numenor.                
    The story of the  fate of  the Silmarils  in Q  I advances  on S, 
  and  here  reaches  an  interesting  transitional  stage  between S 
  and  Q  II,  where the  final resolution  is achieved.  Maidros re- 
  mains  as  in S  the less  fiercely resolute  of the  two surviving 
  sons of Feanor in the fulfilment  of the  oath: in  S it  is Maglor 
  alone  who  steals  a  Silmaril  from  Fionwe's  keeping, and  in Q 
  I  it is  Maidros who  is 'minded  to submit',  but is  argued down 
  by  Maglor.  In  Q  II  the  arguments  remain,  but  the  parts of 
  Maidros  and  Maglor  are  reversed,  just  as  in  $17  (by  later 
  emendation  to  Q  II,  note  10)  Maglor   becomes  the   one  who 
  saved  Elrond  and  Elros. In  Q I  both brothers  go to  steal the 
  Silmarils  from  Fionwe,  as in  the final  version of  the legend; 
  but,  as  in  S,  only Maglor  carries his  away -  for in  the new 
  story Maidros is captured. Yet,  whereas as  in S  only one  of the 
  two  remaining Silmarils  is consigned  to the  deep places  by the 
  act of one of the brothers (Maglor), and the  other is  retained by 
  Fionwe   and   ultimately   becomes   Earendel's  star   -  Maidros 
  playing, so far as can be seen, no further part in its fate, in Q I 
  the burning of the unrighteous hand, and  the realisation  that the 
  right  of the  sons of  Feanor to  the Silmarils  is now  void, be- 
  comes  that  of  Maidros;  and,  a  prisoner  of  Fionwe,  he slays 
  himself, casting the Silmaril on  the ground  (and though  the text 
  of Q I does not go so far as this, the logic of the  narrative must 
  lead to the  giving of  this Silmaril  to Earendel,  as in  S). The 
  emended  version  in  S  (notes  6  and  7),  that Maglor  casts his 
  Silmaril into a fiery pit  and thereafter  wanders singing  in sor- 
  row by the sea (rather  than that  he casts  himself also  into the 
  pit), is taken up into Q I.                                         
    In Q  II the  story has  shifted again,  to the  final harmonious 
  and  symmetrical  structure:  the  Silmaril of  Beren is  not lost, 

 

  and  becomes  the  star  of  Earendel:  both  Maglor  and  Maidros 
  take  a  Silmaril  from  the camp  of Fionwe,  and both  cast them 
  down into inaccessible places. Maidros still  takes his  own life, 
  but does so by casting himself into the fiery pit - and this  is a 
  return  to  the original  story of  Maglor told  in S.  Maglor now 
  casts his Silmaril into the sea - and thus the Silmarils of earth, 
  sea, and sky are retained, but they  are different  Silmarils; for 
  in the earlier versions it was one  of those  from the  Iron Crown 
  of Morgoth that became the Evening Star.                           
    This  extraordinarily complex  but highly  characteristic narra- 
  tive  evolution  can  perhaps be  shown more  clearly in  a table: 

 

          S.           
                       
 The Silmaril cf        


148 

 Beren is  cast into 
 the  sea  by Elwing 
 and lost.              
                       
                       
                       
                       
 Maglor alone steals 
 a  Silmaril  from  
 Fionwe, and es-        
 capes.                
                       
         
                       
 Maglor knows 
 from  the pain of  
 the Silmaril that he  
 no  longer has a 
 right  to it 

 

     QI.      
                       
 As in S.               
                       
 Maidros is minded      
 to submit, but      
 Maglor argues         
 against him.           
                       
 Maidros and            
 Maglor together        
 steal both Silmarils 
 from Fionwe, but       
 Maidros is cap- 
 tured.                 
                       
 Maidros knows          
 from the pair of 
 the Silmaril that he 
 no longe has a        
 right to it.           

 

         QII.        
                    
 The Silmaril of 
 Beren is brought 
 by Elwing to        
 Earendel on         
 Wingelot; with it 
 he goes to Valinor. 
                    
 Maglor is minded 
 to submit, but      
 Maidros argues      
 against him.        
                    
 As in Q I, hut both 
 Ma! dros and        
 Maglor  are permit- 
 ted to depart bear- 
 ing the Silmarils. 
                    
 As in QI.              

 

 

  Maglor casts        
  himself and the 
  Silmaril into a 
  fiery pit           


149 

  > He casts the      
  Silmaril into a pit 
  and wanders by      
  the shores.          
                     
  Maidros' Silmaril 
  is adjudged  by the 
  Gods to Earendel. 

 

 

  Maidros casts his 
  Silmaril on the       
  ground and takes      
  his life.              
                       
  Maglor casts his      
  Silmaril into  a fiery 
  pit  and   wanders  by 
  the shores.           
                       
  [As in S, though      
  this point not        
  reached in Q I].      

 

 

  Maidros casts       
  himself and his 
  Silmaril into a 
  fiery pit.          
                     
  Maglor casts his 
  Silmaril into the 
  sea and wanders 
  by the shores.      
                     
  The Silmaril of 
  Beren, never lost, 
  is retained by      
  Earendel.           

 

    We find still in both versions of  Q, as  in S,  the statement 
  that some of  the returning  Elves went  beyond Tol  Eressea and 
  dwelt in Valinor ('as all were free to do who  willed'. Q  II) - 
  and it is made clear in the Q texts that these included  some of 
  the  exiled  Noldoli,  'admitted to  the love  of Manwe  and the 
  pardon of the Gods'. Also retained in Q I (but not  in Q  II) is 
  the statement that Tun remained deserted., again  without expla- 
  nation given (see p. 87). But whereas in S Tol Eressea  was re- 
  peopled  by 'the  Gnomes and  many of  the Ilkorins  and Teleri 
  and Qendi', in the Q-texts Teleri and  Quendi are  not mentioned 
  here,  only  Gnomes  and  Dark-elves  ('especially  such  as had 
  once belonged to Doriath', Q I).                                 
    In a hasty pencilled note to Q I ($17 note 1) there is  a ref- 
  erence  to  some  Men of  Hithlum being  repentant, and  to !he 
  fulfilment of Ulmo's foretelling (i.e.  'without Men  the Elves 
  shall not prevail against the Orcs and  Balrogs', $16):  both by 
  the  valour  of  the  Men  of  Hithlum,  and  by the  embassy of 
  Earendel to the Valar. This is taken up into Q II in the present 
  section, with the addition  that many  Men new  come out  of the 
  East fought against Morgoth; but further  revision (notes  2 and 
  3) altered this to say that most Men  and especially  these new- 
  comers  from  the  East  fought on  the side  of the  Enemy, and 
  also that in addition to the repentant Men of Hithlum  'all that 
  were left of the three Houses of the Fathers  of Men  fought for 

 

                     S and Q.                     
                                                
  Earendel   (with   Bronweg)    visits   Kor 
  fruitlessly,  for  the  Elves  have already 


150 

  gone ($17).                                    
                                                
  He builds the Tower where all seabirds         
  come (Q: and grieves for the loss of           
  Elwing)($17).                                  
                                                
  By birds' wings Wingelot is lifted into the 
  sky ($17).                                    
                                                
  He  is scorched  by the  Sun and  hunted by 
  the Moon, and wanders  as a  fugitive star. 
  He has no Silmaril. ($17).                    
                                                
  After the Last Battle the Silmaril of          
  Maidros is given to Earendel and Elwing        
  is restored to him; he sails into the Outer 
  Dark with Elwing, bearing the Silmaril         
  ($ 19) [The Q I text ends before this point 
  is reached].                                   

 

               Q II.                           
                                              
  Earendel (with Elwing, and bearing           
  the Silmaril) goes to Valinor, and           
  forbidding Elwing to accompany him           
  further declares 'the embassy of the Two 
  Kindreds' ($17).                             
                                              
  He guides the fleet out of the West; he       
  builds the Tower of Seabirds, and            
  Elwing is with him ($17).                   
                                              
  Elwing devises wings for Wingelot ($17). 
                                              
  He sails the sky bearing the Silmaril        
  (? with Elwing), and the star is seen by the 
  people of the Outer Lands ($ 17).           
                                              
  He descends from the sky to the Last         
  Battle with  countless birds  about him, 
  and slays Ancalagon ($ 18).                  
                                              
  He is scorched by the Sun and hunted by      
  the Moon, and sails as a fugitive star ($19) 
  His ship is hallowed by the Valar and        
  launched through the Door of Night.          
  Elwing is with him ($ 19).                  

 

       Revisions to Q II.                   
                                           
 Earendel bids farewell  to Elwing  for ever 
 on the shore of Valinor ($ 17 note 14). 
                                           
 Earendel's ship is hallowed by  the Valar 
 and set in the sky ($ 17 note 20).         
                                           
 Elwing builds the Tower and devises        
 bird-wings for herself, but cannot         
 reach Earendel, and they are sundered for 
 ever ($17 note 20).                        
                                           
 (Elwing is not with him).                  
                                           
 (Elwing is not with him; $19 note 6).      

 

  broken  by  Maidros);  and  with  the awakening  of the  Elves and 
  the rising of their dead the purpose of Iluvatar will be fulfilled 
  concerning  them.  The  appearance  of  Turin  at the  end remains 
  profoundly  mysterious;  and  here  it is  said that  the prophecy 


151 

  names  him  among  the  Gods, which  is clearly  to be  related to 
  the passage in the old  Tale of  Turambar (II.  116), where  it is 
  said  that  Turin  and Nienor  'dwelt as  shining Valar  among the 
  blessed  ones',  after  they  had  passed  through Fos' Almir, the 
  bath cf flame. In changes  to the  text of  Q II  it is  said that 
  Turin  is  named  among  'the  songs  of  the  Gods',  rather than 
  among  the  Gods,  and  also  that  he  comes  'from the  halls of 
  Mandos'  to  the  final  battle;  about  which I  can say  no more 
  than that  Turin Turambar,  though a  mortal Man,  did not  go, as 
  do the race of Men, to a fate beyond the world.                    
                                                                    
                              APPENDIX 1.                            
                                                                    
          Fragment of a translation of the Quenta Noldorinwa         
            into Old English, made by AElfwine or Eriol;             
                together with Old English equivalents                
                           of Elvish names.                          
                                                                    
  There  are  extant.  fragments of  Old English  (Anglo-Saxon) ver- 
  sions of the Annals of Valinor (three),  the Annals  of Beleriand, 
  and  Quenta  Noldorinwa.  All begin  at the  beginning of  the re- 
  spective  works  arid  only  one,  a  version  of  the  Annals  of 
  Valinor, constitutes a substantial text.  The Old  English version 
  of the Quenta  which is  given here  had no  title, but  my father 
  later inserted in pencil the title  Pennas; cf.  Qenta Noldorinwa 
  or Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh, p.  77. in  a brief  detached list  of El- 
  vish  names  and  words that  belongs to  this period  occurs this 
  entry:                                                             
                                                                    
           Quenta story, tale (quete-'say'). N[oldorin] pent.        
           pennas history (quentasse).                              
                                                                    
    At this time Eriol and AElfwine reappear together as the El- 
  vish and English names of the mariner who came to Tol              

 

  Eressea  and  there translated  various Elvish  works into  his own 
  language: in  the preamble  to the  Annals of  Valinor (p.  310) he 
  is 'Eriol of Leithien, that is AElfwine of  the Angelcynn',  and in 
  one  of  the  Old  English  versions  of these  Annals the  work is 
  said  (p.  334)  to  have  been translated  by 'AElfwine,  whom the 
  Elves  named Eriol'.  (On the  earlier relations  of the  two names 
  see II. 300 - 1.)                                                   
    The  Old  English  version  of  the  Quenta   is  a   very  close 
  equivalent  of  the  Modern  English text  from its  opening 'After 
  the  making  of  the  World  by  the Allfather'  to 'shadow  is her 
  realm and night her throne'  (pp. 94  - 6),  where the  Old English 
  ends. It is a manuscript in ink, obviously a first draft, with pen- 
  cilled  emendations  (mostly  small  alterations of  word-order and 
  suchlike) which  I take  up into  the text;  the last  paragraph is 
  written  in  pencil,  very  rapidly. Acute  accents on  long vowels 
  were put  in rather  sporadically and  I have  made the  usage con- 
  sistent, as with the Old English texts throughout.                  
                                                                     
                                Penn as                               
                                                                     
    AEfter pam pe Ealfaeder, se pe on elfisc Iluuatar                  
  hatte, pas worolde geworhte, pa comon manige pa                     
  mihtegostan gaestas pe mid him wunodon hire to                       
  stieranne; for pon pe hi hie feorran ofsawon faegre                 
  geworhte and hi lustfollodon on hire wlitignesse. has      5             
  gaestas nemdon pa Elfe Valar, paet is pa Moegen, pe                  
  men oft siddan swapeah nemdon Godu. Opre gaestas                      
  manige haefdon hi on hira folgode, ge maran ge                      
  laessan, 7 para sume tealdon men sippan gedwollice                   
  mid paem Elfum; ac hie lugon, for pam pe aer seo          10                   
  worold geworht waere hi waeron, 7 Elfe and Firas (paet                
  sindon men) onwocon aerest on worolde aefter para                    
  Valena cyme. Ealfaeder ana geworhte Elfe and Firas                  
  ond aegperum gedaelde hira agene gifa; py hatad hi                   


152 

  woroldbearn oppe Ealfaederes bearn.                       15 
    Para Valena ealdoras nigon waeron. Pus hatad pa                   
  nigon godu on elfiscum gereorde swa swa pa elfe hit                 
                                                                     
  on Valinore spraecon, peah pe hira naman sind opre 7               

 

 onhwerfede on nold-elfisc, and missenlice sind  hira na- 
 man mid mannum.                                           20 
   Manwe  waes  goda  hlaford,   and  winda   and  wedera 
 wealdend  and  heofones  styrend.  Mid  him   wunede  to 
 his geferan seo  undeadlice heanessa  hlaefdige, uprodera 
 cwen,  Varda  tunglawyrhte.  Him  se  nyxta  on maegene, 
 and  on  freondscipe  se  cudesta,  waes  Ulmo  agendfrea  25 
 ealra waetera, se pe ana wunad on Utgarsecge,  7 styred 
 swapeah  eallum  waegum  7  waeterum,  earn  7  streamum, 
 wyllum    ond   aewelmum   geond    eordan   ymbhwyrfte. 
 Him underpyded,  peah he  him oft  unhold bid,  is Osse, 
 se  pe manna  landa saem styred, 7  his gefera  is Uinen   30 
 merehlaefdige.  Hire  feax  lip  gespraedd geond  ealle sae 
 under heofenum.                                              
   On  maegene  waes  Aule  Ulmo  swidost gelic.  He waes 
 smip  and  creaftiga, 7  Yavanna waes  his gefera,  seo pe 
 ofet  and  haerfest  and  ealle eordan  waestmas lufode.   35 
 Nyxt   was   heo  on   maegene  para   Valacwena  Vardan. 
 Swipe wlitig  waes  heo,  and  hie  pa  Elfe  nemdon  oft 
 Palurien paet is 'eorpan sceat'.                             
   Pa   gebropru   Mandos   7   Lorien   hatton  Fanturi. 
 Nefantur  hated  se  aeresta,  neoaerna   hlaford,  and    40 
 waelcyriga,  se  pe  samnode  ofslaenra   manna  gaestas. 
 Olofantur  hated  se  oder,  swefna wyrhta  7 gedwimora; 
 7   his  tunas   on  goda   landum  waeron   ealra  stowa 
 faegroste  on  worolde  7  waeron  gefylde   mid  manigum 
 gaestum wlitigum and mihtigum.                             45 
   Ealra   goda   strengest   7    leopucraeftigost   and 
 foremaerost  ellendaedum  waes  Tulkas;  py  hated  he eac 
 pon Poldorea  se  ellenrofa  (se  dyhtiga);  and  he waes 
 Melkoes unwine and his wiprbroca.                            
   Orome  waes  mihtig hlaford  and lytle  laessa maegenes  50 
 ponne  Tulkas  sylf.  Orome   waes  hunta   7  treowcynn 
 lufode  -  py  hatte  he  Aldaron,  7 pa  noldielfe hine 
 Tauros  nemdon,  paet  is  Wealdafrea   -  7   him  waeron 
 leofe  hors  and  hundas.  Huru he  eode on  huntod purh 
 pa deorce land aer  pam pe  seo sunne  wurde gyt atend/     55 
 onaeled;  swipe hlude  waeron  his  hornas,  7   swa  beod 

 

 giet on fridum and feldum pe Orome ah on Valinore.                            
 Vana hatte his gefera, seo waes gingra sweostor hira                           
 Vardan 7 Palurienne, 7 seo faegernes ge heofenes ge                           
 eordan bid on hire wlite and hire weorcum. Hire 60                            
 mihtigre swapeah bid Nienna, seo pe mid Nefantur                               
 Mandos eardad. Mildheort bid heo, hire bid geomor                             
 sefa, murnende mod; sceadwa bid hire scir 7 hire                              
 prymsetl peostru.                                                              
                                                                              
                                    NOTES.                                    
                                                                              
      6.   Morgen  ('Powers')  was  emended  to  Reg...  (?Regen  ?Regin). Old 
           English regn- in compounds  'great, mighty',  related to  Old Norse 
           regin 'Gods' (occurring in Ragnarok).                               
     11.   Firas  is  an emendation  of Elde  (both are  old poetic  words for 
           'men').  At  line  13  Firas  is  written  beside  Elde,  which was 
           emended to AElde (and Elfe apparently to AElfe).                      
     13.   Valena genitive plural is an emendation from Vala; also in line 16. 
     26.   on  Utgarsecge:  Ut-garsecg  'the  Outer  Seas'.  Garsecg,  one  of 
           many Old English names of the sea, is  used frequently  in AElfwine 
           of England of the Great Sea of the West (in one of the  texts spelt 
           Garsedge        to       represent        the       pronunciation). 
     41.   waelcyriga: 'chooser of the slain (wael)',  the Old  English equiva- 
           lent of Old Norse valkyrja (Valkyrie).                              


153 

 55 - 6.  atend, onaeled: these words  are alternatives,  but neither  is marked 
          for rejection.                                                       
 62-3.    Cf.  Beowulf  lines  49  - 50:  him waes  geomor sefa,  murnende mod 
          ('sad was their heart and mourning in their soul').                  
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
    Associated with the Old English texts are several lists of El-             
 vish names with  Old English  equivalents, some  of which  are of             
 much interest for the light they  cast on  the meaning  of Elvish             
 names;  though  many  are not  in fact  translations, as  will be             
 seen.                                                                         
    There is firstly a list of the Valar:                                      

 

       The chief gods are Frean. os (ese).                          
                                                                   
 [O.E. frea 'ruler, lord', os 'god' (in proper names as             
 Oswald), with mutated vowel in the plural.]                        
                                                                   
 Manwe  is  Wolcenfrea  [O.E.  wolcen  'sky',  cf.  Modern English 
 welkin.]                                                           
                                                                   
 Ulmo is  Garsecges  frea,  &  ealwaeter-frea  [For  Garsecg  see 
 note  to line  26 of  the O.E.  Quenta. In  that text  Ulmo is 
 called  agendfrea  ealra  waetera  'Lord of  Waters' (literally 
 'owning lord of all waters').]                                     
                                                                   
 Aule is Craeftfrea.                                                 
                                                                   
 Tulkas is Afodfrea [O.E. afod, eafod 'might, strength'.]            
                                                                   
 Orome  is  Wadfrea  and  Huntena  frea  [O.E.   wad  'hunting', 
 'Hunting  Lord and  Lord of  Hunters'. In  the O.E.  Quenta he 
 is Wealdafrea 'Lord of Forests', translating Tauros.]               
                                                                   
 Mandos  is  Nefrea  [O.E.  ne(o)  'corpse',  cf.  neoaerna hlaford 
 'master  of  the  houses  of  the  dead'  in  the O.E.  Quenta. On 
 the Elvish name Nefantur see p. 199.]                              
                                                                   
 Lorien is Swefnfrea [O.E. swefn 'dream'.]                          
                                                                   
 Melko  is  Manfrea,  Bolgen,  Malscor  [O.E.  man  'evil,  wicked- 
 ness';  bolgen  'wrathful'.  An  O.E.  verbal  noun  malscrung  is 
 recorded,   with  the   meaning  'bewildering,   bewitching';  see 
 the  Oxford  English  Dictionary   s.v.  Masker   (verb),  'bewil- 
 der'.]                                                             
                                                                   
 Osse is Saefrea.                                                     
                                                                   
 There are also  several lists  of Old  English equivalents  of El- 
 vish names of  persons and  places, and  since they  all obviously 
 belong to the  same period  I combine  them and  give them  in al- 
 phabetical order:                                                  
 Aldaron: Beaming [O.E. beam 'tree'.]                               
 A.mon Uilas: Sinsnaw, Sinsnaewen [O.E. sin- 'perpetual',            
 appears in the Quenta, p. 98 note 2.]                              

 

 Ancalagon: Anddraca  [O.E. and-  as the  first element  in com- 
 pounds  denotes  opposition,  negation  (anda  'enmity, hatred, 
 envy'); draca 'dragon' (see II. 350).]                          
                                                                
 Angband:   Engbend,  Irenhell   [Engbend  contains   O.E.  enge 
 'narrow, strait, oppressive, cruel' and bend 'bond, fetter', it 
 is  thus  not  a translation  but a  word-play between  the two 
 languages.]                                                     
                                                                
 Asgar: Baening [This river, Ascar in Q  as in  The Silmarillion, 
 is also Asgar in  the Annals  of Beleriand  (p. 367).  I cannot 
 interpret  Baening.  If  a  derivative of  O.E. ban  'bone' (cf. 


154 

 baenen  'of  bone')  it  might  have  some  meaning  like  'the 
 place (i.e. the river)  filled with  bones', with  reference to 
 the Dwarves  who were  drowned in  the river  at the  battle of 
 the Stony Ford; but this does not seem at all probable.]        
                                                                
 Balrog:  Bealuwearg,  Bealubroga [O.E.  bealu 'evil',  cf. Mod- 
 ern English  bale(ful); wearg  'felon, outlaw,  accursed being' 
 (Old  Norse  vargr  'wolf,  outlaw',  whence the  Wargs); broga 
 'terror'.  These  O.E.  names are  thus like  Engbend ingenious 
 sound-correspondences contrived from O.E. words.]               
                                                                
 Bansil: Beansil, Beansigel  [The second  element is  O.E. sigel 
 'sun, jewel' (cf. J. R. R. Tolkien,  Sigelwara land,  in Medium 
 AEvum  III, June  1934, p.  106); the  first is  presumably beam 
 'tree'. This is another  case where  AElfwine used  Old English 
 words to give a likeness of  sound (with  of course  a suitable 
 meaning), rather than a translation.- In  the Name-list  to The 
 Fall of Gondolin Bansil is  translated 'Fair-gleam',  II. 214.] 
                                                                
 Baragund, Barahir: Beadohun, Beadomaer [O.E. beadu               
   'battle'.]                                                    
                                                                
 Bauglir: Broga [O.E. broga 'terror'.]                           
                                                                
 Beleg: Finboga [O.E. boga 'bow'.]                               
                                                                
 Belegar:  Ingarsecg,   Westsae,  Widsae  [The  Gnomish   name  of 
 the Great Sea has not yet  appeared in  the texts.  Ingarsecg = 
 Garsecg; Utgarsecg is the  Outer Sea  (see note  to line  26 of 
 the O.E. Quenta).]                                              

 

 Belegost: Micelburg ['Great fortress', the original meaning      
   (see II. 336).]                                                
                                                                 
    Blodrin Ban's son: Blodwine Banan sunu [Blodwine presum-      
    ably contains O.E. blod 'blood'; while bana is 'slayer'.] 
                                                                 
 Doriath:    Ealand,    Folgen(fold),    Infolde,   Wudumaeraland 
 [O.E. ealand,  land by  water or  by a  river -  doubtless with 
 reference  to  the rivers  Sirion and  Esgalduin. Folgen(fold): 
 O.E. folgen is the past participle  of feolan  'penetrate, make 
 one's way, get to',  but the  cognate verbs  in Gothic  and Old 
 Norse have the meaning  'hide', and  it may  be that  folgen is 
 here given the sense of Old Norse  folginn 'hidden',  i.e. 'the 
 hidden  (land)'.  Gondolin  is  called  Folgenburg.  Infolde, a 
 word  not  recorded,  perhaps  has some  meaning like  'the in- 
 ner  land',  'the  land  within'.  Wudumaeraland  no  doubt con- 
 tains maere 'boundary, border'.]                                 
                                                                 
 Dor-lomen: Womanland [See Ered-lomen.]                           
                                                                 
   Drengist:  Nearufleot [Drengist  has not  yet appeared  in the 
   texts. O.E. nearu' narrow', fleot ' arm of the sea, estuary, 
   firth'.]                                                       
                                                                 
   Ered-lomen:   Womanbeorgas   [O.E.   woma    'sound,   noise', 
   beorg  'mountain';  sc. the  Echoing Mountains,  and similar!y 
   Womanland for  Dor-lomen, Land  of Echoes.  This is  the later 
   etymology of these names; see pp. 233 - 4,]                    
                                                                 
   Gelion:  Glaeden  [Gelion  appears by  emendation of  Flend in 
   the  Quenta  $14.  O.E.  glaedene  'iris,  gladdon', as  in the 
   Gladden  Fields  and  Gladden  River  in   The  Lord   of  the 
   Rings.]                                                        
                                                                 
   Gondolin:   Stangaldor(burg),   Folgenburg,   Galdorfaesten 
   [O.E. stan 'stone'; galdor 'spell, enchantment', faesten 'fast- 
   ness,  fortress'. For  Folgenburg (?  'the hidden  city') see 
   Doriath.]                                                      


155 

                                                                 
         Hithlum: Hasuglom, Hasuland (Hasulendingas) [O.E. hasu 
 grey ., glom 'gloaming, twilight'. Hasulendingas the people 
 of Hasuland'.] 
                                                                 
 Laurelin:  Gleng(g)old [O.E.  gleng ornament,  splendour'; 

 

 Glengold is not a translation but a sound-imitation of           
 Glingol ('Singing-gold', II. 216.]                               
                                                                 
 Mithrim: Mistrand, Mistora [O.E. ora 'bank, shore', and          
 rand of the same meaning.]                                      
                                                                 
 Nargothrond:     Hlydingaburg,     Stangaldor(burg)     [Hly- 
 dingaburg  is the  city of  the Hlydingas,  the people  of Narog 
 (Hlyda).  Stangaldor (burg)  is also  given as  an O.E.  name for 
 Gondolin.]                                                       
                                                                 
 Narog: Hlyda [Hlyda 'the loud one' (O.E. hlud 'loud'; see        
 III. 87 - 8).]                                                   
                                                                 
 Silmaril: Sigel, Sigelmaerels  [For sigel  see Bansil  above. O.E 
 maerels  'rope',  Sigelmaerels is  another case  of imitation  - but 
 it refers to the Necklace of the Dwarves.]                       
                                                                 
 Sirion:  Fleot  (Flewet),  Scirwendel [Fleot  must here  have the 
 meaning  'river',  which  is scarcely  evidenced in  Old English, 
 though it  is the  general meaning  of the  word in  cognate lan- 
 guage  (cf.  Drengist  above).  Scirwendel:  O.E.  scir 'bright'; 
 wendel  does  not  occur,  but certainly  refers to  the windings 
 of a  river's course  - cf.  Withywindle, the  river in  the Old 
 Forest,  concerning  which  my  father  noted: '-windle  does not 
 actually  occur  (Withywindle  was   modelled  on   withywind,  a 
 name  of  the  convolvulus  or  bindweed)'  (Guide  to  the Names 
 in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  in A  Tolkien Compass,  p. 196).] 
                                                                 
 Taur-na-Danion:  Furhweald  [In  an  addition  to  the  Quenta $9 
 (note  1)  Taur Danin  is given  as the  former name  of Taur-na- 
 Fuin, when it  was still  'wholesome, if  thick and  dark'; Taur- 
 na-Danion   here   was   changed  to   Taur-na-Donion,  precursor 
 of  Dorthonion  'Land  of  Pines'. O.E.  furh 'fir,  pine', weald 
 'forest'.]                                                       
                                                                 
 Taur-na-Fuin:      Nihtsceadu,       Nihtsceadwesweald,      Atol 
 Nihtegesa,   Nihthelm unfaele   [O.E.  sceadu   'shadow';  weald 
 'forest', atol 'dire, terrible', egesa 'terror';  niht-helm 'cover 
 of  night',  a  poetic  compound  found  in  BeowuLf   and  other 
 poems;  unfaele  'evil'.  Cf.  the  Modern  English translation, 
 found  in  the long  Lays and  in the  Quenta, 'Forest  of Deadly 
 Nightshade'.]                                                    

 

 Tindbrenting  pe  pa  Brega  Taniquetil  a nemnad ['Tindbrenting 
 which  the  Valar  name  Taniquetil':  see  III.  127,  and for 
 Brega see Vala.]                                                  
                                                                  
 Vala:  Bregu  [O.E.  bregu  ruler,  lord,   plural  (unrecorded) 
 brega.  Two   other  words   were  added   to  the   list: Maegen 
 'powers',  which  is  used  in the  O.E. Quenta  line 6,  and Ese 
 (see p. 255).]                                                    
                                                                  
 Valinor:  Breguland,  Godedel  [O.E.  edel  'country,  native 
   land'.]                                                         
                                                                  
 Valmar: Godaburg, Bregubold [O.E. bold 'dwelling'.]               
                                                                  
   Another  page  gives Old  English equivalents  of the  names of 
 the Kindreds of the Elves, and of the princes  of the  Noldoli ar- 
 ranged in a genealogical table. This page is headed:              
                                                                  


156 

               Firas. Includes both Men and Elves.                 
                                                                  
   This contradicts the  use of  Firas in  the O.E.  Quenta, where 
 it appears as an emendation of Elde  (lines 11  and 13),  used in 
 distinction to Elfe. Then follows:                                
                                                                  
                            Fira bearn.                            
              $l. Paet eldre cyn: Elfe oppe Wine.                   
 l. Ingwine: lyftelfe, heahelfe, hwitelfe, Lixend. Godwine         
                                                                  
 2.  Eadwine:  goldelfe,  eordelfe,  deopelfe,  Raedend.  Fin- 
 ning as                                                           
                                                                  
 3.  Saewine:  saeelfe,  merepyssan,  flotwine,  Nowend.  Elwingas 
                                                                  
 Wine can only be  O.E. wine  (old plural  wine) 'friend'  (a word 
 used of equals, of superiors, and of inferiors); but its use here 
 as a general term equivalent to Elfe is curious.                  
   Of  the  names given  to the  First Kindred,  lyftelfe contains 
 O.E.  lyft  'sky, air',  Lixend 'Shining  Ones'. The  Second Kin- 
 dred: Ead- in the context of  the Noldoli  is in  no doubt  to be 
 interpreted 'riches'. I  am not  sure of  the meaning  of Raedend, 

 

  though it clearly refers to the know1edge and desire for knowl- 
  edge of the Noldoli in some aspect. Finningas 'the people of     
  Finn' (Ing and Finn as the Gnomish forms of Ingwe and Finwe 
  were still found in Q $2, though removed by later changes to   
  the text). The Third Kindred: O.E. merepyssa 'sea-rusher'       
  (used in recorded O.E. poetry of ships); flotwine contains O. 
  flot 'sea', Nowend 'mariners., shipmasters'.                    
                                                                  
    In  the  geneaiogical table  that follows  Feanor is  given the 
  Old  English  name  Finbros  Gimwyrhta  ('Jewel-wright'); since 
  his sons are here  called Brosingas  (from Brosinga  mene 'the 
  necklace of the  Brosings' in  Beowulf, line  1199) -bros  is pre- 
  sumably   a   back-formation  from   Brosingas.  They   are  also 
  called  Yrfeloran:  an  unrecorded  compound,  'those  bereft  o 
  their inheritance', the  Dispossessed. The  Brosingas or  sons o 
  Feanor are given thus:                                           
                                                                  
       1. Daegred  Winsterhand   [O.E. daegred   'daybreak,  daven'; 
       winsterhand   'left-banded'   {for    the   right    hand   of 
       Maidros  was  cut  off  in  his  rescue  from  Thangorodrim, 
       Q  $8).  l  can  cast   no  light   on  the   O.E.  equivalent 
       Daegred  for  Maidros,  un1ess  an  extremely  late  note  on 
       Maidros  (Maedhros)  is  relevant   (for  ideas   long  buried 
       so  far  as  written  record  goes  might  emerge  again  many 
       years later): according to  this he  inherited 'the  rare red- 
       brown  hair  of  Nerdanel's  kin'   (Nerdanel  was   the  wife 
       of  Feanor,  The  Silmarillion  p.  64),  and  was  called 'by 
       his   brothers   and   other  kin'   Russandol  'copper-top'.] 
                                                                  
       2.   Daegmund   Swinsere   [I   cannot  explain   Daegmund  for 
       Maglor.    O.E.   mund    is   'hand',    also   'protection', 
       swinsere  (not  recorded}  'musician,  singer'  (cf. swinsian 
       'make music').]                                             
                                                                  
       3.  Cynegrim  Fagerfeox  [Celegorm  'Fairfax',  i.e.  fair- 
       haired.  Cynegrim  is  probably  the  substitution   of  an 
       O.E. name with some;similarity of sound.]                   
                                                                  
  4. Cyrefinn Facensearo [Curufin the Crafty, O.E. cyre            
      'choice', facen 'deceit, guile, wickedness' (a word of       

 

  wholly bad meaning); searu 'skill, cunning' (also with            
  bad  meaning,  'plot,  snare,  treachery'); facensearu            
  'treachery'.]                                                     
                                                                   
 5. Colpegn Nihthelm [Cranthir the Dark. O.E. col 'coal';             


157 

  for nihthelm see under Taur-na-Fuin above.]                       
                                                                   
 6. Deormod ) huntan [Damrod and Diriel the hunters. 
 7. Tirgeld )                                                       
  O.E.  deormod  'brave-hearted',   tir  'glory';   -geld  (-gild) 
  in names, 'of worth'.]                                            
                                                                   
 Fingolfin appears as Fingold Fengel (O.E. fengel 'king,            
 prince', cf. III. 145), and his sons are Finbrand (i.e. Finweg/ 
 Fingon)  and  Finstan  (i.e.  Turgon);  the  element  stan 'stone' 
 presumably  showing  that  -gon  in   Turgon  is   gond  (gonn) 
 'stone', see I. 254. Fingolfin's daughter is Finhwit (i.e. Isfin), 
 and  Eol  is  Eor;  Meglin  is  Manfrid  (an  unrecorded  compound 
 of man 'evil deed, wickedness' and frid 'peace').                   
 Finbrand  (i.e.  Finweg/Fingon)  here  has  a  son,   Fingar;  and 
 the daughter of Finstan (i.e. Turgon) is Ideshild Silfrenfot (i.e. 
 Idril Celebrindal).                                                
 Finrod  (i.e.  the  later  Finarfin)  is  called   Finred  Felanop 
 (felanop  'very  bold'), and  his sons  are Inglaf  Felahror (i.e. 
 Felagund;  felahror  has  the  same  meaning  as  felanop), Ordred 
 (i.e. Orodreth), Angel  (i.e. Angrod),  and Eangrim  (i.e. Egnor). 
 Ordred  (i.e.  Orodreth)  has  two   sons,  Ordhelm   and  Ordlaf; 
 his daughter  is Fripuswip  Fealuleome (i.e.  Finduilas Failivrin; 
 fealuleome perhaps 'golden light').                                
 Lastly, there  is a  fourth child  of Finwe  given in  this table: 
 Finrun Felageomor (felageomor 'very sorrowful'),                   
 The  name  given  to  Felagund, Inglaf  Felahror, is  notable; for 
 Felagund  was  to  become  his  'nickname',  and  his   true  name 
 Inglor (as it remained until replaced  long afterwards  by Finrod, 
 when the original Finrod became Finarfin); see p, 411.             
                                                                   
                                 *                                  

 

                              APPENDIX 2.                             
                                                                     
                          The Horns of Ylmir.                         
                                                                     
 This  poem  is  unquestionably  that  referred   to  in   the  Quent 
 p. 170:  'the might  and majesty  of that  vision is  told of  in the 
 song  of  Tuor  that  he  made  for  his  son  Earendel.' It  is extant 
 in  three  versions  and five  texts. The  first version,  found only 
 in one manuscript, consists of 40 lines, beginning:                  
                                                                     
          I sat on the ruined margin of the deep-voiced echoing sea 
 and ending:                                                          
  and I wake to silent caverns, and empty sands, and peace            
                                                                     
 (lines  15 and  66 in  the text  given below).  To the  manuscript in 
 ink my  father added  in pencil  the title  The Tides,  together with 
 the  notes  Dec.  4  1914  and On  the Cornish  Coast. For  his visit 
 to  the  Lizard  Peninsula  in  Cornwall  in the  summer of  1914 see 
 Humphrey  Carpenter,  Biography,  pp.   70  -   1.  But   although  I 
 have found nothing earlier than  this text  it is  clear from  my fa- 
 ther's  notes  to  subsequent  versions  that  he remembered  the or- 
 igin of the poem to be earlier than that time.                       
                                                                     
  The  second  version  bears  the   title  Sea   Chant  of   an  Elder 
 Day  (and  Old  English  Fyrndaga  Saeleop),  and  is  extant  in  two 
 manuscripts  which  differ  only  in  small  details.  The  second has 
 some   minor   emendations,   and   the  date:   Mar.  1915   <  Dec. 
 1914  <   1912,  also   Essay  Club   [of  Exeter   College,  Oxford] 
 March 1915. This version begins:                                     
                                                                     
     In  a  dim  and  perilous region,  down whose  great tempes- 
     tuous ways                                                       
  I  heard  no  sound  of men's  voices; in  those eldest  of the 
     days,                                                            
  I  sat  on  the  ruined  margin  of  the   deep-voiced  echoing 
     sea...                                                           


158 

                                                                     
 (i.e. it begins at  line 13  in the  text, p.  265) and  contains two 
 further  lines  after  'and  empty  sands,  and  peace'   (where  The 
 Tides ends):                                                         

 

    In a lovely sunlit region down whose old chaotic ways                    
  Yet no sound of men's voices echoed in those eldest of all                 
    days.                                                                    
                                                                            
 It  is  from  this  version,  not   that  of   1914,  that   Humphrey  Car- 
 penter  cites  the  first  six  lines  (ibid. pp.  73 -  4). The  Sea Chant 
 differs  from  The  Tides   both  by   extension  (it   has  50   lines  as 
 against 40) and in the reconstruction of many verses.                       
  Against  the  second  text   of  the   Sea  Chant   my  father   wrote  in 
 pencil:                                                                     
                                                                            
  This is the song that Tuor told to Earendel his son what time              
  the Exiles of Gondolin dwelt awhile in  Dor Tathrin  the Land              
  of Willows after the burning of their city. Now Tuor  was the              
  first  of  Men  to  see  the  Great Sea,  but guided  by Ulmo              
  towards  Gondolin he  had left  the shores  of the  Ocean and              
  passing  through  the  Land  of  Willows became  enamoured of              
  its loveliness, forgetting both his quest and his former love              
  of  the  sea. Now  Ulmo lord  of Vai  coming in  his deep-sea              
  car sat at twilight in the reeds of Sirion and played  to him              
  on his magic flute of hollow shells. Thereafter did Tuor hun-              
  ger ever after the sea and had no peace in  his heart  did he              
  dwell in pleasant inland places.*                                          
                                                                            
 This  very  evidently  belongs  with  the  tale  of  The  Fall of           
 Gondolin (see especially II. 153 - 6), and was no doubt  added at           
 the time of the composition of the tale (and of the third version           
 of the poem), since the Sea Chant  has no  point of  contact with           
 the Tuor legend, nor indeed  with any  feature of  the mythology.           
                                                                            
  The third version, entitled The  Horns of  Ulmo, is  extant in             
 a manuscript and in a typescript taken directly from it, and it             
 is only now that the references to  Ulmo and  Osse (and  to the             
 rending of the Earth by the Gods in the primeval  darkness) ap-             
 pear in the poem. A note on the  MS, written  at the  same time             
 as the poem, reads:                                                         
                                                                            
 (*Dor Tathrin occurs in the Name-list to The Fall of Gondolin, II. 346, and 
 Ulmo's 'deep-sea car' in the tale of The Chaining of Melko, I. 101.)        

 

  1910-11 - 12  rewr[itten] &  recast often.  Present shape  due to 
  rewriting  and  adding  introd[uction]  &  ending  in   a  lonely 
  house  near  Roos,  Holderness   (Thistle  Bridge   Camp)  Spring 
  1917                                                             
                                                                  
 (For  Roos  see  Humphrey  Carpenter, Biography,  p. 97.)  A fur- 
 ther pencilled note adds: 'poem to 'The Fall of Gondolin".'       
  Thus the  absorption of  the poem  into the  legend of  Tuor and 
 Earendel  took  place at  much the  same time  as the  writing of 
 the tale of The Fall of Gondolin (see I. 203, II. 146); it should 
 have been given in The Book of Lost Tales Part II.                
  A  few  small   emendations  were   made  to   the  MS   of  The 
 Horns  of  Ulmo,  notably  Ulmo  >  Ylmir  (the latter  being the 
 Gnomish  form,  found in  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin and 
 in the 'Sketch'), and the second reference to Osse (lines 41 - 2, 
 replacing two earlier verses). The typescript is  essentially the 
 same  as  the  manuscript  (with  the  words  'from "The  Fall of 
 Gondolin" ' added beneath the title), but it  has some  small al- 
 terations  made  in  red ball-point  pen, which  therefore belong 
 to a much  later time.  These late  changes are  not incorporated 
 in the  text given  here, but  are given  in notes  following the 
 poem.                                                             
                                                                  
                         The Horns of Ylmir                        


159 

                               from                                
                      'The Fall of Gondolin'.                      
                                                                  
     'Tuor  recalleth  in  a  song sung  to his  son Earendel      
     the  visions  that  Ylmir's  conches once  called before      
     him in the twilight in the Land of Willows.'                  
                                                                  
       'Twas  in  the  Land  of Willows  where the  grass is  long and 
       green -                                                     
       I  was  fingering  my harp-strings,  for a  wind had  crept un- 
       seen                                                        
     And  was  speaking  in  the  tree-tops, while  the voices  of the 
       reeds                                                       

 

                       
                                                                    
      Were  whispering reedy  whispers as  the sunset  touched the 
      meads,                                                         
 5.  Inland  musics  subtly  magic  that  those reeds  alone could 
      weave -                                                        
     'Twas  in  the  Land  of  Willows  that  once  Ylmir  came at 
      eve.                                                           
                                                                    
      In the twilight by the river on a hollow thing of shell        
      He made immortal music, till my heart beneath his spell        
     Was broken in the twilight, and the meadows faded dim           
 10. To  great  grey  waters  heaving round  the rocks  where sea- 
      birds swim.                                                    
                                                                    
      I  heard  them  wailing  round  me  where  the  black cliffs 
      towered high                                                   
      And the old primeval starlight flickered palely in the sky. 
     In  that  dim and  perilous region  in whose  great tempestu- 
      ous ways                                                       
     I heard  no sound  of men's  voices, in  those eldest  of the 
      days,                                                          
 15. I sat on the ruined margin of the deep-voiced echoing sea       
     Whose roaring foaming music crashed in endless cadency          
     On the land besieged for ever in an aeon of assaults            
     And  torn in  towers  and  pinnacles  and  caverned  in great 
      vaults;                                                        
     And its arches  shook with  thunder and  its feet  were piled 
      with shapes                                                    
 20. Riven  in  old  sea-warfare  from   those  crags   and  sable 
      capes.                                                         
                                                                    
     Lo!  I  heard  the  embattled  tempest  roaring up  behind the 
     tide                                                           
     When  the  trumpet  of  the  first  winds  sounded,   and  the 
     grey sea sang and cried                                         
     As  a  new  white  wrath  woke  in  him,  and his  armies rose 
      to war                                                         
      And swept in billowed cavalry toward the walled and            
      moveless shore.                                                

 

  25.    There the windy-bannered fortress of those high and vir- 
         gin coasts                                                
       Flung back the first thin feelers of the elder tidal hosts; 
       Flung back the restless streamers that like arms of a ten- 
         tacled thing                                              
       Coiling  and  creeping  onward  did  rustle and  suck and 
         cling.                                                    
       Then  a  sigh  arose  and a  murmuring in  that stealthy- 
         whispering van,                                           
  30.  While, behind, the torrents gathered and the leaping bil- 
         lows ran,                                                 
       Till the foam-haired water-horses in green rolling volumes 
         came -                                                    
       A mad tide trampling landward - and their  war-song burst 


160 

         to flame.                                                 
                                                                  
         Huge heads were tossed in anger  and their  crests were 
         towers of froth                                           
       And the song the great seas  were singing  was a  song of 
         unplumbed wrath,                                          
  35     For through that giant welter Osse's  trumpets fiercely 
         blew,                                                     
       That  the voices  of the  flood yet  deeper and  the High 
         Wind louder grew;                                         
       Deep hollows hummed and  fluted as  they sucked  the sea- 
         winds in;                                                 
       Spumes and great white spoutings yelled shrilly  o'er the 
         din;                                                      
       Gales blew the bitter tresses of the sea in the land's dark 
         face                                                      
  40.  And wild airs thick with spindrift fled on a whirling race 
       From battle unto battle, till the power of all the seas 
       Gathered like one mountain about Osse's awful knees,        
       And a dome of shouting water  smote those  dripping black 
         facades                                                   
       And its catastrophic fountains smashed in  deafening cas- 
         cades.                                                    
                                                                  
  45.    Then the immeasurable hymn of  Ocean I  heard as  it rose 
         and fell                                                  

 

                             
                                                                      
        To its organ whose stops were  the piping  of gulls  and the 
        thunderous swell;                                              
      Heard  the  burden  of  the  waters  and  the  singing  of the 
        waves                                                          
      Whose  voices  came  on  for  ever  and  went  rolling  to the 
        caves,                                                         
      Where  an  endless  fugue  of  echoes  splashed   against  wet 
        stone                                                          
  50    And   arose  and   mingled  in   unison  into   a  murmuring 
        drone -                                                        
      'Twas  a  music  of  uttermost  deepness  that stirred  in the 
        profound,                                                      
      And  all  the  voices  of  all  oceans  were gathered  to that 
                                                                      
        sound;                                                      
                                                                      
        'Twas  Ylmir, Lord  of Waters,  with all-stilling  hand that 
        made                                                           
        Unconquerable harmonies, that the roaring sea obeyed,          
  55. That its  waters poured  off and  Earth heaved  her glistening 
        shoulders again                                                
      Naked up into the airs and cloudrifts and sea-going rain,        
        Till the suck and suck of green eddies and the slap  of rip- 
        ples was all                                                   
      That  reached  to  mine  isled stone,  save the  old unearthly 
        call                                                           
      Of  sea-birds  long-forgotten  and  the  grating   of  ancient 
        wings.                                                         
                                                                      
  60.   Thus  murmurous  slumber  took  me  mid  those  far-off  el- 
        dest things                                                    
      (In a lonely twilit region down whose old chaotic ways           
      I  heard  no sound  of men's  voices, in  those eldest  of the 
        days                                                           
      When  the  world  reeled  in  the  tumult  as  the  Great Gods 
        tore the Earth                                                 
      In the darkness, in the tempest of the cycles ere our birth), 
  65. Till the tides went out, and the  Wind died,  and did  all sea 
        musics cease                                                   
      And  I  woke  to  silent  caverns and  empty sands  and peace. 


161 

 

        Then the magic drifted from me and that music loosed its              
            bands -                                                           
        Far, far-off, conches calling - lo! I stood in the sweet              
            lands,                                                            
        And the meadows were about me where the weeping wil-                  
            lows grew,                                                        
 70.    Where the long grass stirred beside me, and my feet were                  
            drenched with dew.                                                
        Only the reeds were rustling, but a mist lay on the                   
            streams                                                           
        Like a sea-roke drawn far inland, like a shred of salt sea-           
            dreams.                                                           
        'Twas in the Land of Willows that I heard th'unfathomed               
            breath                                                            
        Of the Horns of Ylmir calling - and shall hear them till              
            my death.                                                         
                                                                             
                                    NOTES.                                    
                                                                             
 The following are the late changes made to the typescript, referred to on 
 p. 264:                                                                      
                                                                             
 1 and 6.    Twas to It was.                                                  
 16.         The line changed to: Whose endless roaring music crashed in      
             foaming harmony, and marked with an X.                           
 21.         roaring to rolling.                                              
 28.         The line marked with an X, probably primarily on account of      
             the use of did (cf. III. 153).                                   
 65.         The line changed to: Till the tides went out, and the Wind       
             ceased, and all sea musics died (but this destroys the rhyme). 
 72.         'sea-roke'; roke is a medieval English word surviving until re- 
             cent times in dialect meaning 'mist, fog, drizzling rain'.       

 

 

 

                                      IV.                                    
                                                                            
                           THE FIRST 'SILMARILLION'                          
                                     MAP.                                    
                                                                            
 This  map  was  made  on  a  sheet  of  examination  paper  from  the 
 University  of  Leeds  (as  was   most  of   the  A-text   of  the   Lay  of 
 the  Children  of  Hurin,  III.  4), which  suggests that  it originated 
 in  association  with  the  Lay,  or  perhaps  rather with  the 'Sketch 
 of  the  Mythology'  which  was   written  to   accompany  it   (p.  11). 
 On   the   other  hand,   some  names   which  seem   to  belong   with  the 
 first  making  of  the  map  do  not   appear  in   the  texts   before  the 
 Quenta.  Though  it  was  not  drawn  initially  in  a  way   that  would 
 suggest  that  my  father  intended  it  to  endure,  it  was   his  working 
 map   for   several  years,   and  it   was  much   handled  and   much  al- 
 tered.  Names  were  emended   and  places   re-sited;  the   writing  is 
 m  red  ink,  black  ink,  green  ink,  pencil,   and  blue   crayon,  often 
 overlaying   each   other.  Lines   representing  contours   and  others 
 representing   streams  tangle   with  lines   for  redirection   and  lines 
 cancelling other lines.  But it  is striking  that the  river-courses as 
 drawn  on  this  first  map   were  scarcely   changed  at   all  after- 
 wards.                                                                     
   Associated with the map are two supplementary sheets, 
 giving an Eastern and a Western extension to the main or cen- 
 tral map; these are reproduced and annotated subsequently (see 
 insert). The main map is on a single sheet but is here repro- 
 duced in two halves, Northern and Southern. Names that were 
 written in red ink all seem to belong to the original 'layer' of 
 names, as do some (e.g. Huan, Mavwin, Turgon) of those in 
 black ink; but Taiglin, Geleidhian, in red, do not otherwise oc- 
 cur before the Quenta. Those in green ink are few: Broseliand; 
 Gnomes on the Northern half beside Gondolin, and on the 
 Southern half beside Nargothrond; and Wandering Gnomes in 


162 

 the South-east. 

 

   In the following alphabetically-ordered list I take each half               
 in turn* and comment on almost  every item,  noticing especial-               
 ly where the name in  question first  appears in  the narrative               
 texts.                                                                        
                                                                              
                         The Northern HaIf of the Map.                         
                                                                              
   Aglon, Gorge of The name itself is a hasty later addition. The              
   Gorge  of Aglon  first occurs  in the  Lay of  Leithian (lines              
   2062,  2995, passages  composed in  1928). In  the Lay  and in              
   Q ($$9, 10) the Gorge is the dwelling of  the Sons  of Feanor,              
   who are placed  on the  map to  the North  of it  (and circled              
   with an arrow directing to the East).                                       
                                                                              
   Angband The placing  of Angband  in relation  to Thangoro-                  
   drim shows how my father saw them at the time of  the long                  
   Lays and the 'Sketch'. In the Lay of the Children of Hurin                  
   (lines 712 - 14) the 'hopeless halls of Hell' are                           
                                                                              
             wrought at the roots of the roaring cliffs                        
             of  Thangorodrim's   thunderous  mountain.                        
                                                                              
   In the Lay of Leithian (lines 3526ff.) Angband's gate seems                 
   clearly  to  lie  beneath  Thangorodrim;  and  in   S  ($8)                 
   Thangorodrim is 'the highest of  the Iron  Mountains around                 
   Morgoth's  fortress'.  See  further  the commentary  on the                 
   Ambarkanta, p. 307.                                                         
                                                                              
     Angeryd The Iron Mountains. Cf. Angorodin in the Tale of 
   Turambar (II. 77).                                                          
                                                                              
     Angrin Aiglir Aiglir Angrin occurs twice in the Lay of the 
   Children of Hurin (lines 711, 1055), emended later to Eiglir                
   Engrin (in The Silmarillion Ered Engrin).                                   
                                                                              
 (* The list of names for the northern half includes names as far south as the 
 fold  in  the  original map,  which can  be seen  in the  reproductions; thus 
 Ginglith, Esgalduin, Thousand Caves appear in the first list, but Doriath be- 
 yond Sirion, Aros in the second.)                                             

 

 Aryador  This  name  reappears,  rather  surprisingly,  from the 
 Lost  Tales, as  a third  name of  Hithlum. In  the tale  of The 
 Coming  of  the  Elves (I.  119) hador  is said  to be  the name 
 among Men for Hisilome; see also I. 249.                          
                                                                  
 Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears The  Mound of  Slain is  placed in 
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (lines 1439  ff.) 'at  the fur- 
 thest  end  of  Dor-na-Fauglith's  dusty  spaces'  (Flinding and 
 Turin  were  wandering  westward,  line  1436);  cf. also  Q$11 
 'Finweg  and  Turgon  and  the  Men  of  Hithlum  were  gathered 
 in the West upon the borders of the Thirsty Plain.'               
                                                                  
 Beleg and Turin These names mark the north march of               
     Doriath, where Beleg and Turin fought together against the 
 Orcs, an element that first entered the story in the Lay  of the 
 Children of Hurin (see III. 27).                                  
                                                                  
 Cristhorn  Placed  in  the  mountains  north (not  as originally 
 south) of Gondolin, as already in the  fragment of  the alliter- 
 ative Lay of Earendel (III. 143).                                 
                                                                  
 Deadly Nightshade, Forest of See Taur-na-Fuin.                    
                                                                  
 Dorlomin See Hithlum.                                           
                                                                  
 Dor-na-Fauglith  This  name  arose  during  the  composition  of 
 the Lay of the Children of Hurin (see III.  55), where  also the 


163 

 Thirsty Plain  is found.  On the  map this  is an  emendation of 
 The Black Plain.                                                  
                                                                  
 Dwarf-road  to Belegost  and Nogrod  in the  South It  is inter- 
 esting  that  the  Dwarf-road is  shown as  leading all  the way 
 from Nogrod  and Belegost  in the  far South  to the  very doors 
 of the Thousand Caves. It is possible, if not very  likely, that 
 the  'Dwarf-road'  on   the  map   merely  indicates   the  path 
 that   the   Dwarves  did   in  fact   take  when   summoned  to 
 Doriath, rather than a beaten track.                              

 

 Eredwethion A later replacement of Eryd Lomin, as also in              
   Q II $15 (note 1).                                                   
                                                                       
   Eryd Lomin This name occurs in the caption to the painting           
   of Tol Sirion of July 1928, where, as on the map and in              
   Q   II   $15,   it   refers   to   the  Shadowy   Mountains;  see 
   pp. 192-3.                                                           
                                                                       
   Esgalduin  First  found  in  the  Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin 
   (III. 93). It is said in Q ($9) that it 'came  out of  secret wells 
   in   Taur-na-Fuin',   see   Shadowy    Spring.   The    course   of 
   Esgalduin was not afterwards changed.                                
                                                                       
 Ginglith First occurs in the Lay of the Children of Hurin              
   (III. 88). Its course was never changed.                             
                                                                       
   Gondolin  Placed  as  it was  to remain.  The lines  running south 
   and   west   from  the   Encircling  Mountains   perhaps  represent 
   the hidden 'Way of Escape'.                                          
                                                                       
   Hithlum  Obviously  Hithlum  was  not  intended  to  extend  south 
   of  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  despite  the   placing  of   the  M. 
   The  contour  lines  show  that  the  Mountains  of   Mithrim  did 
   not  yet  exist.  Dorlomin  is  given as  an alternative  name, as 
   it  is  in  S  and  Q  ($8),  where  Lake  Mithrim  is  placed  in 
   Hisilome/Hithlum/Dorlomin;   on   the   map   Mithrim   is  simply 
   and solely the name of the lake (cf. III. 103).                      
                                                                       
     Huan That a territory, south and east of Ivrin, is assigned to 
   Huan shows a very early stage in the legend of Beren and             
   Luthien, when Huan was independent of any master (see                
   III.  244).                                                          
                                                                       
   Isle  of  the  Werewolves  The Isle  first appears  in the  Lay of 
   Leithian  in  a  passage  written  in March  1928 (see  III. 234). 
   Originally  marked  on  the  map  S.W.   of  Gondolin,   and  with 
   the  river  Sirion dividing  quite broadly  and enclosing  a large 
   island,  this  site  was  struck  out, and  an arrow  directs from 
   here to a more northerly position,  not far  south of  the battle- 

 

 field  of  Unnumbered Tears.  The later  map brought  it some- 
 what southward again.                                           
                                                                
 (line 1526); it is placed on the  map in  the position  that I 
 dunk is indicated in the Lay (see III. 87),  and where  it re- 
 mained.                                                         
                                                                
 Land of Dread Occurs twice in the Lay of Leithian (lines 49, 
 383) of the realm of Morgoth.                                   
                                                                
 Mavwin It is  curious that  the map  retains the  old name, 
 which  goes  back  to  the  Tale  of  Turambar, for  Morwen is 
 found already in the second version  of the  Lay of  the Chil- 
 dren  of  Hurin  (III.  94)  and  in  S. In  S ($9)  Hurin and 
 Morwen 'lived in the woods on the borders of Hithlum'.          
                                                                
 Mindeb First occurs in the Lay of Leithian, line 2924           
 (April 1928).                                                   


164 

                                                                
 Mithrim, Lake See Hithlum.                                    
                                                                
 Mountains of Iron See Angeryd, Angrin Aiglir.                
                                                                
 Nan Dun-Gorthin  As the  map was  originally drawn  this was 
 placed  west of  Sirion, S.W.  of Gondolin  and very  close to 
 the Isle of the  Werewolves (as  that was  originally placed). 
 This cannot be the same placing as in the Lay  of the  Fail of 
 Gondolin (III.  148), where  the hidden  door of  Gondolin was 
 actually 'in dark Dungorthin'.                                  
   Subsequently   Nan-Dungorthin   was   struck  out   and  the 
 name written again further  north, still  west of  Sirion, but 
 close  beneath  the  Shadowy   Mountains.  This   position  is 
 clearly that of the Lay of the Children of Hurin,  where Turin 
 and  Flinding  passed  the  site of  the Battle  of Unnumbered 
 Tears, crossed Sirion  not far  from his  source, and  came to 
 'the  roots  ...  of  the Shadowy  Mountains', where  they en- 
 tered the valley of Nan Dungorthin (see III. 59, 87).           
   Later  again,  an  arrow  was  drawn  moving  Nan Dungorthin 

 

 to a  position east  of Sirion  and north  of Doriath,  and so 
 more  or  less  into  the  position  of  Nan  Dungorthin  (Nag 
 Dungortheb) on the later map.                                  
                                                               
  Orcs' Road of Haste Cf. S $12: 'the Orc-road... which the 
 Orcs use when in need of haste.'                               
                                                               
 Shadowy  Mountains  First occurs  in the  Lay of  the Children 
 of Hurin (see III. 29). See Eryd Lomin.                        
                                                               
 Shadowy  Spring  It  is  notable  that  the  rivers  Aros  and 
 Esgalduin  arise  at  the  same place,  in the  Shadowy Spring 
 (not previously  named in  the texts;  see Esgalduin).  In the 
 later map,  on which  mine in  the published  Silmarillion was 
 based, this is still  the case,  and my  map, showing  the two 
 sources as separate, is regrettably in error.                  
                                                               
 Silver Bowl Shown in the Taiglin itself (not  as later  in the 
 tributary stream  Celebros), as  in the  Tale of  Turambar and 
 still in S and Q ($13).                                        
                                                               
 Sirion The course of the river was never changed; in the later 
 map my father followed the earlier precisely.                  
                                                               
 Sirion's Well This is referred to in the Lay of the Children of 
 Hurin (line 1460). Its site remained unchanged.                
                                                               
 Sons of Feanor See Aglon.                                      
                                                               
 Taiglin This looks like an  original element  on the  map, al- 
 though the  name does  not otherwise  occur until  the Quenta, 
 $13 (see p. 223).                                              
                                                               
 Taur-na-Fuin  This  name (for  Taur Fuin  of the  Lost Tales) 
 and its translation Deadly Nightshade first occur in  the Lay. 
 of the Children cf Hurin (III. 55).                            
                                                               
 Thangorodrim See Angband.                                      

 

  Thimbalt This name  occurs nowhere  else. It  is not  clear from 
  the map  what it  represents, but  since an  area marked  out by 
  dots   surrounds   Angband,   and   a  similar   area  surrounds 
  Thimbalt,  it  seems  likely  that  this  was  another fortress. 
  Thimbalt was struck out in pencil.                               
                                                                  
  Thirsty  Plain  See  Dor-na-Fauglith.  Thirsty is  an emendation 
  in black ink of Black in red ink.                                
                                                                  


165 

  Thousand  Caves  First  occurs  in  the Lay  of the  Children of 
  Hurin. It is here placed as  it was  to remain,  where Esgalduin 
  bends westward towards Sirion.                                   
                                                                  
  Woodmen  of  Turambar  This  is  the  second  and  later placing 
  of  the  Woodmen on  the map;  see notes  on the  southern half. 
                                                                  
                   The Southern Half of the Map.                   
                                                                  
  Aros, River Aros has  only been  named hitherto  in the  Tale of 
  the  Nauglafring,  where  after  the  sack  of  Artanor (Doriath) 
  the  Dwarves  journeying  thence  to  their  homes in  the South 
  (II. 225) had to pass  the 'fierce  stream' Aros  at Sarnathrod, 
  the Stony Ford (II. 236). It is also said in the same place that 
  Aros, nearer to its spring, ran past the doors  of the  Caves of 
  the  Rodothlim,  though  against  this  my  father  later  noted 
  (II. 244 note 15) 'No [?that] is  Narog', while  in the  Tale of 
  Turambar  it  is  said  (II.  81)  that the  Caves were  above a 
  stream that 'ran down to feed the river Sirion'.  I am  not sure 
  how to interpret this. If it is assumed that  the Stony  Ford in 
  the Tale of the  Nauglafring was  on the  (later) Aros,  then the 
  Caves  of  the  Rodothlim  were  on  that  river also,  which is 
  most  improbable.  On  the other  hand, if  Aros was  simply the 
  earlier  name  of  Narog,  the question  arises why  the Dwarves 
  fleeing out of  Artanor should  have been  going in  this direc- 
  tion.                                                            
     On the whole I am inclined to  think that  the phrase  in the 
  Tale  of the  Nauglafring saying  that Aros  ran past  the Caves 
  of  the  Rodothlim  was a  momentary confusion  in a  text writ- 
  ten  at  very great  speed (II.  221), and  that the  Stony Ford 
  (but not  the Caves)  was always  on the  Aros, this  river hav- 

 

  ing always borne this name. If this is so, this is still the ge- 
  ography  on  the  map  (as  originally  marked in  this detail), 
  where  Athrasarn  (Stony  Ford)  was  placed  on the  Aros half- 
  way  between  Umboth-muilin  and  the  inflowing  of  Celon.  At 
  this  time  the  Land  of the  Cuilwarthin was  in the  North of 
  the Hills of  the Hunters;  and therefore  in the  story implied 
  by the  map Beren  and his  Elves crossed  Sirion from  his land 
  and   ambushed  the   Dwarves  on   the  southern   confines  of 
  Doriath.  It  is  not  clear  why  the  Dwarves were  not taking 
  the  Dwarf-road  from  the  Thousand  Caves,  which  crossed the 
  Aros  much  higher  up;  on  this  point  see  the  note  on the 
  Dwarf-road in the northern half of the map.                      
    Before  the first  map was  laid aside  the idea  had changed, 
  and  when  the  Land  of  the  Cuilwarthin  was  moved  eastward 
  (see  note on  Beren) the  Stony Ford  was moved  eastward also; 
  for the later history see under the  Eastward Extension  of this 
  map.                                                             
                                                                  
 Athrasarn (Stony Ford) See Aros.                                  
                                                                  
  Beren The first  placing of  Beren and  Land of  the Cuilwarthin 
  (Land of the Dead that Live), in the North of  the Hills  of the 
  Hunters  and  in  the  proximity  of  Nargothrond,  agrees  with 
  the Lay of the Children of Hurin lines 1545 -  6 (see  III. 89), 
  and so still in S ($10). In the  Last Tales  the Dead  that Live 
  Again  were  (i-)Guilwarthon,  changed in  the Tale  of Tinuviel 
  (II.  41)  to  i-Cuilwarthon;  in  Q  ($14)  the land  is called 
  Cuilwarthien, changed to Gwerth-i-Cuina.                         
    Subsequently   Beren   and  Land   of  the   Cuilwarthin  were 
  struck out in  this position,  and Land  of the  Cuilwarthin re- 
  entered much further  to the  East, in  the empty  lands between 
  Sirion  and Gelion.  This was  again struck out, in  pencil, with 
  the note 'Lies to the east of  this and  beyond the  Great Lands 
  of  the  East  and  of  wild  men'  (on  which  see   Beren  and 
  Luthien  and  Great Lands  under   the  Eastward   Extension  of 
  the  map).  In Q  (514) the  Land of  the Dead  that Live  is in 
  Assariad  (>Ossiriand),  'between  the  river  [Gelion]  and the 


166 

  [Blue] mountains'.                                               

 

  Broseliand  This  name  occurs  first in  the Lay  of Leithian, 
  with  the  spelling  Broceliand  (III.  158-9,  169); BeLeriand 
  first appears (i.e. as originally typed,  not as  an emendation 
  of Broseliand) in Q $13,  and in  the Lay  of Leithian  at line 
  3957. Broseliand  occurs also  in the  note in  red ink  in the 
  south-east corner of the map; this is  given together  with the 
  later alterations to it at the end of these notes on the south- 
  ern half.                                                       
                                                                 
  Celon, River This has not occurred in any text. The course of 
  Celon is the same as on the later map, the river rising (in the 
  Eastward Extension of the present map) in Himling.              
                                                                 
 Cuilwarthin, Land of the See Beren.                             
                                                                 
  Doriath  The  bounds of  Doriath are  represented, I  think, by 
  Mindeb,  by  the  dotted  line  (above  'Beleg and  Turin') be- 
  tween Mindeb  and Aros,  then by  Aros and  Sirion to  the dot- 
  ted line  encircling 'Doriath  beyond Sirion',  and so  back to 
  Mind eb.                                                        
                                                                 
  Doriath beyond Sirion It is said  in Q  ($13) that  the Taiglin 
  'enters the land of Doriath ere it joins with the  great waters 
  of Sirion'. As  a name,  'Doriath beyond  Sirion' has  only oc- 
  curred in a note on the MS of the Tale of the Nauglafring 
  (II. 249).                                                      
                                                                 
  Duil Rewinion This name of the  Hills of  the Hunters  (also on 
  the  Westward  Extension of  the map)  is not  found elsewhere. 
                                                                 
 Dwarf-road See Aros.                                             
                                                                 
  Geleidhian This occurs in the note in the corner of the map      
  as the Gnomish name of Broseliand. It is found in additions 
  to Q, $9 (note 2)  and $10  (note 15);  see also  photo insert. 
                                                                 
  Guarded Plain, The First occurs in the Lay of the Children of 
  Hurin (III. 88). On the later map the name is written over a 
  much larger  area further  to the  North-east, and  outside the 

 

 boundaries  of  the  realm  of  Nargothrond  as shown  on that 
 map (see Realm of Narog beyond Narog).                         
                                                               
 Hill of Spies This first appears in Q $13 (see p. 224). If, as 
 would  seem  natural,  the  Hill  of  Spies  is  the  eminence 
 marked  by  radiating  lines  a  little  north  of  east  from 
 Nargothrond, the name itseif is placed oddly distant  from it, 
 and  seems  rather  to refer  to the  highland rising  N.E. of 
 Nargothrond, between Narog and Taiglin.                        
                                                               
 Hills of the Hunters, The First named in the Lay of  the Chil- 
 dren  of  Hurin, though  they had  been described  without be- 
 ing  named  in  the  Tale  of  Turambar;  see  my  discussion, 
 III. 88. On  the map  the Hills  of the  Hunters a-e  shown as 
 extending far southwards towards  the coast  of the  Sea, with 
 the  Narog  bending  south-eastwards  along  the  line  of the 
 Hills; and  there is  an outlying  eminence above  the unnamed 
 cape in the S.W. corner of the map (later Cape Balar).         
                                                               
 Ingwil First occurs in the Lay of the Children of Hurin        
 (III. 88 - 9).                                                 
                                                               
 Luthien  caught  by  Celegorm  In the  Lay of  Leithian (lines 
 2342  -  7) Celegorm  and Curufin  hunting oui  of Nargothrond 
 with  Huan  on  the  occasion when  Luthien was  captured rode 
 for 'three days',                                              
                                                               


167 

             till nigh to the borders in the West               
             of Doriath a while they rest.                      
                                                               
 Marshes of Sirion On the  later map  called 'Fens  of Sirion'. 
                                                               
 Nan Tathrin (Land  of Willows)  For the  name Nan  Tathrin see 
 III. 89. It was already placed essentially thus in the tale of 
  The Fall of Gondolin (see  II. 153,  217), and  in Q  $16 Nan- 
 Tathrin 'is watered by the Narog and by Sirion'.               
                                                               
      Nargothrond Nargothrond was placed first further to the 
   South and nearer to the confluence with Sirion; the second 

 

                                                                          
                                                                              
        site is  where it  remained -  but it  is curious  that in  both sites 
        it  is marked  as lying  on the  east side  of the  river: in  the Lay 
        of  the  Children  of  Hurin  it  was  on the  western side  (cf. line 
        1762),  and,  I  would  think,   always  had   been.  (On   the  West- 
        ward Extension map this is corrected.)                                 
          In   Q  $9,   after  the   Battle  of   Sudden  Flame   Barahir  and 
        Felagund  'fled  to  the  fens  of  Sirion  to  the South',  and after 
        swearing    his    oath    to    Barahir    Felagund    'went   South' 
        (emended   to   'South   and    West')   and    founded   Nargothrond. 
        This  would  in  fact  point  to  the  first  site  of  Nargothrond on 
        the map; since the later site is due West from the fens.               
                                                                              
        Narog  First  occurs in  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin. The       
        course of the river was scarcely changed subsequently.                 
                                                                              
        Realm  of  Narog  beyond  Narog  This was  hastily added  to the       
        map in  blue crayon,  together with  the broken  line indicating       
        its  boundaries.  On  the  later map  the 'Realm  of Nargothrond       
        beyond  the  river'  covers  a  much  larger  territory  to  the       
        North-east (see Guarded Plain).                                        
                                                                              
        Sirion See notes on the northern half.                                 
                                                                              
        Sirion flows underground See Umboth-muilin. Sirion's fall is            
        also referred to in the Lay of the Children of Hurin, lines            
        1467-8.                                                                
                                                                              
        Umboth-muilin   The   name   goes   back   to   the   Tale    of   the 
        Nauglafring  (II.   225).  It   emerges  from   the  Lay   of  Leithian 
        (lines   1722   if.)   that   the   Twilight   Meres  were   north  of 
        Sirion's  fall  and  passage  underground,  whereas  in  the  tale of 
        The  Fall  of'  Gondolin  the  reverse  was  the  case  (see  II. 217, 
        HI. 222 - 3).                                                          
                                                                              
        Waters  of  Sirion  Cf. S  $16 'The  remnant reaches  Sirion and       
        journeys  to  the land  at its  mouth -  the Waters  of Sirion',       
        and  $l7  'He  returned  home  and  found  the Waters  of Sirion       
        desolate.'                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                   

 

  Woodmen   of   Turambar   The   Woodmen   were  first   placed  a 
  long  way  away  from their  later location  - south  of Sirion's 
  passage  underground  and  north  of  Nan  Tathrin,   with  their 
  land (shown  by a  dotted line)  extending on  both sides  of the 
  river.  This position  is quite  at variance  with what  was said 
  in  the Tale  of Turambar  (II. 91):  'that people  had houses... 
  in lands  that were  not utterly  far porn  Sirion or  the grassy 
  hills of that river*s middle course', which as  I said  (II. 141) 
  'may  be  taken  to  agree  tolerably with  the situation  of the 
  Forest  of Brethil'.  The first  placing of  the name  was struck 
  out,  and  the  second agrees  with Q  ($13); 'their  houses were 
  in  the  green  woods  about  the River  Taiglin that  enters the 
  land of Doriath ere it joins  with the  great waters  of Sirion.' 


168 

                                                                  
 Note on the south-east corner of the map, in  red ink  with later 
 pencilled additions:                                              
                                                                  
  All  the  lands  watered  by  Sirion  south  of  Gondolin [added: 
  or   more   usually   R.   Taiglin]   are   called   in   English 
  'Broseliand',  Geleidhian  by  the  gnomes.  [Added:  -  but this 
  usually  does  not  include  Doriath.  Its  east boundary  is not 
  shown. It is the Blue Mountains.]                                
                                                                  
 It is interesting that Broseliand is said to be the English name; 
 and that Doriath is not usually included in Broseliand.           
  Lastly,  it may  be mentioned  that of  the highlands  rising on 
 the eastern side of the lower course of Sirion there is  no trace 
 on the later map.                                                 
                                                                  
          THE WESTWARD AND EASTWARD EXTENSIONS TO THE MAP.         
                                                                  
  These  supplementary  maps  were  drawn   in  relation   to  the 
 main or central  map and  substantially overlapping  it: they are 
 in  close  accord  with it  in all  features where  they overlap. 
 These sheets  were carefully  laid out,  but the  actual markings 
 were  done extremely  rapidly in  soft pencil,  and are  now very 
 faint; the paper is thin and the maps are  battered. Some  alter- 
 ations and  additions were  made in  ink (some  of the  rivers of 
 Ossiriand are written in ink and some in pencil).                 
                                                                  
                                                                  

 

    The notes on these supplementary maps include almost all 
  names that do not occur on the main map, and a few that occur 
  on both which have features of interest on the extensions. 
                                                                    
                       The Westward Extension.                       
                                                                    
  Bridge of  Ice The  words in  the N.W.  corner 'Far  north lies 
  the  bridge  of  Ice' refer  to the  Helkarakse, but  the meaning 
  of  the  word  'bridge'  is  only  explained  in  the  Ambarkanta 
  (see pp. 291 - 2).                                                 
                                                                    
  Brithombar (and Eldorest) This  is the  first occurrence  of the 
      Havens  of the  Falas. That  Osse persuaded  some of  the Teleri 
      to  remain  'on  the  beaches  of  the  world'  is  mentioned in 
      Q  $3;  and  in  a  later  rewriting  of  a  passage  in  Q  $11 
      (note  14) the  presence of  Elves 'from  the Falas'  before the 
      Battle of Unnumbered Tears is referred to.                     
                                                                    
   Brithon,  River  The  first  occurrence  of  the name,  as of 
      Brithombar  the  haven  at  its  mouth. The  later imposition 
      on  the  coast-line  as originally  drawn of  the river-mouth 
      and  the  long  cape giving  protection to  the haven  can be 
      seen.                                                          
                                                                    
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  They  are  shown  as  being  lords  of a 
   'fief' N.W. of the Hills  of the  Hunters, with  Felagund ruling 
   in Nargothrond.                                                   
                                                                    
   Eldor, River The first occurrence of the  name. This  river was 
      later  named  Eglor,  Eglahir, and  finally Nenning,  its course 
      remaining unchanged.                                           
                                                                    
   Eldorest, Haven of Eldorest  The first  occurrence of  the name 
      (see  Brithombar).  The  haven  at  the mouth  of the  Eldor be- 
      came  Eglorest  when  the  river  became the  Eglor, and  so re- 
      mained  (Eglarest  in  The  Silmarillion)  when  the  river  was 
      again renamed Nenning.                                         
                                                                    
   Felagund See Celegorm and Curufin.                               

 


169 

 Hithlum The mountain-range fencing Hithlum on the West          
 (later Ered Lomin when that name was transferred from the       
 Shadowy Mountains, see pp. 233 - 4) is shown.                   
                                                                
 Morwen This is written over Mavwin (see this entry under        
 the main map).                                                  
                                                                
     Nargothrond is now placed on the west bank of Narog.        
                                                                
 Orc-Mountains Extensive highlands cover the entire region       
 between Brithombar and the range forming the southern           
 fence of what was later called Nevrast. On the later map        
 these highlands are retained in the region between the          
 sources of the Brithon and the Eldor (Nenning), and are too     
 little represented on my map in the published Silmarillion. 
   Here Morgoth reaches the shores is probably a reference       
 to the story that has not yet emerged in the texts, that in the 
 year after the Battle of Unnumbered Tears 'Morgoth sent         
 great strength over Hithlum and Nevrast, and they came          
 down the rivers Brithon and Nenning and ravaged all the         
 Falas' (The Silmarillion p. 196).                               
                                                                
 Realm of Narog Of the three occurrences, that in the centre     
 between the Hills of the Hunters and the river was put in at 
 the time of the making of the map; the other two (Realm of      
 Narog in the West, and Realm of Narog Beyond Narog to           
 the East of the river) were entered in blue crayon at the       
 same time as Realm of Narog beyond Narog on the main            
 map, as also was the continuation of the broken line, mark- 
 ing the northern boundary, as far as the river Eldor.           
                                                                
 Tower  of  Tindobel  This  stands  where  on  the  later  map is 
 Barad  Nimras  (the  tower  raised  by  Felagund  'to  watch the 
 western sea', The Silmarillion pp. 120, 196). Tindobel  is first 
 mentioned in the Annals of Beleriand (later than the            
 Quenta), p. 398.                                                
                                                                
        Ylmir's Way Ylmir, almost certainly the Gnomish form of 
   Ulmo, is found in the Lay of the Children of Hurin (III. 93) 

 

 and regularly  in  S.  With 'Ylmir's  Way' cf.  the tale  of The 
 Fall of Gondolin (II. 149 - 50):                                    
                                                                    
     Thereafter  'tis said  that  magic  and  destiny  led  [Tuor] on 
     a  day  to  a  cavernous  opening  down  which  a  hidden  river 
     flowed  from  Mithrim.  And  Tuor  entered  that   cavern  seek- 
     ing  to  learn  its  secret,  but  the  waters of  Mithrim drove 
     him  forward  into  the  heart  of  the rock  and he  might not 
     win back into the light. And this,  'tis said,  was the  will of 
     Ulmo  Lord  of  Waters  at  whose  prompting  the   Noldoli  had 
     made that hidden way.                                           
                                                                    
 It  is not  clear from  this passage  at what  point the  river out 
 of  Lake   Mithrim  went   underground.  In   the  story   of  Tuor 
 written   long   afterwards   and   given   in   Unfinished   Tales 
 Tuor followed  'a sudden  spring of  water in  the hills'  (p. 21), 
 and                                                               
                                                                    
     he  came  down  from  the  tall  hills  of  Mithrim  and  passed 
     out  into  the  northward  plain  of  Dor-lomin;  and  ever  the 
     stream  grew  as  he  followed  it  westward, until  after three 
     days  he  could  descry  in  the  west the  long grey  ridges of 
     Ered Lomin... (Unfinished Tales, p. 20).                        
                                                                    
 The   Gate   of   the   Noldor,  where   the  stream   went  under- 
 ground, was in the eastern foothills of Ered Lomin.                 
     Ylmir's  Way  issues  in  a firth  that is  unnamed on  the map 
 (Drengist  has  hitherto  only  occurred  in  the  list of  Old En- 
 glish names, p. 257).                                               


170 

                                                                    
 It will be seen that the  western coastline  is closely  similar to 
 that on the later map.                                            
                                                                    
                       The Eastward Extension.                       
                                                                    
 Adurant,  River  The  most  southerly of  the tributaries  of Ge- 
 lion,  named  in  an addition  to Q  514 (note  4). Its  course and 
 relation  to   the  mountains   and  the   other  rivers   was  not 
 changed.                                                            

 

  Ascar, River  The name  of the  northernmost of  the tributaries 
  of  Gelion  occurs  in  Q  $14  (see  entry  Flend  below).  Its 
  course and relation to the  mountains and  the other  rivers was 
  not changed.                                                     
                                                                  
  Beren  and  Luthien  Here  dwelt  Beren  and Luthien  before de- 
  struction  of  Doriath  in  Land  of  Cuilwarthin.  On  the main 
  map  the  second  placing  of  this  land,  between  Sirion  and 
  Gelion, was rejected with the note:  'Lies to  the east  of this 
  and  beyond  the  Great  Lands  of  the East  and of  wild men.' 
  This  must  mean  that  my  father  was moving  the Land  of the 
  Dead  that Live  far away  into unknown  regions (see  the entry 
  Great  Lands);  but  the  Eastward  Extension  map places  it in 
  the  final  position,  in the  region of  the Seven  Rivers: see 
  Gweirth-i-cuina.                                                 
                                                                  
 Blue Mountains These were first named in Q $9.                   
                                                                  
  Brilthor, River This, the fifth of the tributaries of Gelion, is 
  named in  an addition  to Q  $14 (note  4); later  emendation to 
  Q  moved  Duilwen  further  south  and  brought   Brilthor  into 
  the fourth place.                                                
                                                                  
  Broseliand  Here  is  end  of  Broseliand,  written  between the 
  rivers Ascar and  Thalos, and  against the  western feet  of the 
  Blue Mountains. Cf. the addition to  the note  in the  corner of 
  the  main  map (p.  280): 'Its  east boundary  is not  shown. It 
  is the Blue Mountains.'                                          
                                                                  
 Cuilwarthin See Beren and Luthien, Gweirth-i-cuina.               
                                                                  
   Damrod  and  DirieL  The  note  above  the  name  Diriel  reads: 
   'Here  is  a  wide  forest  where  many fugitive  gnomes wander. 
   Orcs  come  seldom.'  Cf.  Q  $14:  'the  woods about  the River 
   [Flend/Gelion],  where  aforetime   were  the   hunting  grounds 
   of Damrod and Diriel.'                                          
     The  note  below  the  name  Diriel  reads:  'Here   also  are 
   many  Ilkorins  who  do  not  live  in  Doriath  but  fought  at 
   Nirnaith  Unoth.'  Nirnaith  Unoth  occurs  in  the  Lay  of the 
   Children  of  Hurin,  replaced  by  Nirnaith  Ornoth  (III.  79, 

 

 102,  123).  On  Dark-elves  at the  Battle of  Unnumbered Tears 
 see S and Q $11.                                                 
                                                                 
 Dolm, Mt. This is the first appearance of the mountain after- 
 wards named Dolmed, placed as on the later map.                  
                                                                 
 Duilwen This, the third of the tributaries  of Gelion,  is named 
 m an addition to Q $14 (note 4), where  it is  placed as  on the 
 map  between  Thalos   and  Loeglin.   Later  emendation   to  Q 
 gave  the  final  order,  with  Duilwen  moved  south  to become 
 the fifth tributary.                                             
                                                                 
 Dwarf-road  and  Sarn Athra  As  the  Dwarf-road   was  first 
 marked  on  this  map,  after crossing  Aros it  bent south-east 
 and  ran  in  that  direction  in  a  straight line  across East 
 Broseliand,  crossing  (Flend)  Gelion   at  Sarn  Athra,  which 
 (having  been  moved  from  its  position   on  the   main  map, 


171 

 where  it  was on  the Aros)  was now  placed at  the confluence 
 of the third  tributary river  (here Duilwen).  The line  of the 
 road goes off the  map in  the south-east  corner, with  the di- 
 rection:  'Southward  in  East  feet   of  Blue   Mountains  are 
 Belegost  and  Nogrod.'  This  site  for Sarn Athra  agrees with 
 Q  $14,  where  the  ford  is  near  the  confluence  of (Flend) 
 Gelion and Duilwen.                                              
    A  later  route  for the  Dwarf-road is  also marked  on this 
 map.  Here  the  road  bears  more  nearly east  in the  land of 
 Damrod  and  Diriel  and  so  crosses  (Flend)   Gelion  further 
 north: Sarn Athra  is now  placed just  below the  confluence of 
 Ascar  with Gelion  (this is  the reason  for the  emendation of 
 Duilwen  to  Ascar  in  Q  514,  note  7).  It then  follows the 
 course  of  Ascar on  the southern  side, crosses  the mountains 
 by  a  pass  below  Mount  Dolm,  and  then turns  sharply south 
 and goes away on the eastern side of the mountains.              
    On the  later map  Sarn Athra  is placed  just above  the con- 
 fluence  of  Ascar  and  Gelion,  and  the  road  therefore goes 
 along the northern bank of  Ascar, but  still crosses  the moun- 
 tains  south  of   Mount  Dolmed;   the  Dwarf-cities   are  now 
 placed  in  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountains not  far from 
 Mount Dolmed.                                                    

 

         East Broseliand The term East Beleriand occurs in Q $14. 
                                                                  
   Flend  In  Q $14  the great  river of  East Beleriand  was first 
   named  Ascar,  but  since  Ascar was  already in  Q the  name of 
   the  northernmost  of  the tributaries  from the  Blue Mountains 
   I think that this was a mere slip (see p. 229 and  footnote) for 
   Flend,  to  which it  was emended.  Flend then  > Gelion,  as on 
   the  map.  The  course  of  Gelion  was not  changed afterwards, 
   but  the  map  does  not  show the  later eastern  tributary arm 
   ('Greater Gelion').                                             
                                                                  
 Gelion See Flend.                                                 
                                                                  
 Great Lands The note down the right hand side of the map        
   reads: 'Here lie the Great Lands of the East where Ilkorins 
   (dark-elves) and Wild Men live, acknowledging Morgoth as        
   God and King.' This use of Great Lands for the lands of .       
   Middle-earth east of the Blue Mountains is notable; it is       
   used also on the main map, where the third site of the Land 
   of the Dead that Live is said to lie 'beyond the Great Lands 
   of the East and of wild men' (see Beren and Luthien). In the 
   Lost Tales the term Great Lands always means the lands be-      
   tween the Seas (i.e. the whole of the later Middle-earth); in 
   S and Q Outer Lands (which in the Lost Tales meant the          
   Western Lands) is used of Middle-earth, with later emenda-      
   tion to Hither Lands in Q.                                       
      The statement here that in the Great Lands of the East       
   both Wild Men and Dark-elves acknowledged Morgoth as            
   God and King is significant for the future. Cf. the emenda- 
   tion to Q II $18, note 3: 'But most Men, and especially         
   those new come out of the East, were on the side of the En- 
   emy.' The corruption of certain Men in the beginning of         
   their days appears in very early synopses (for Gilfanon's       
   Tale); see I. 236.                                              
                                                                  
   Gweirth-i-cuina  This  name,  in  which  Gweirth-  is apparently 
   emended   from   Gwairth-,   is   written    over   Cuilwarthin. 
   Gwerth-i-cuina  (not  Gweirth-  as  on  the  map)  has  appeared 
   in  two  emended  passages  in  Q:  $10  (note  15)  'they  wan- 

 

                                                                 
                                                                      
    dered...  upon  the  confines  of  Geleidhian  in  fair Ossiriand, 
   Land  of   Seven  Streams,   Gwerth-i-cuina,  the   Living  Dead' 
     (where  the  name  seems  to  be  used  of  Beren  and  Luthien 
    themselves); and  $14 (note  6) 'Elves  called it  oft Gwerth-i- 


172 

     cuina', where it is used of the land, as on the map.              
                                                                      
   Humling The first occurrence is in the Lay of Leithian lines        
    2994 - 5 (April 1928):                                             
                                                                      
                              where Himling's watchful hill            
        o'er Aglon's gorge hung tall and still.                        
                                                                      
     Loeglin  As  the  fourth  of  the tributaries  of Gelion  this is 
     named  in  an  addition  to  Q  514  (note  4).  Later emendation 
     moved  Duilwen  further  south  and  brought  Loeglin   (>  Lego- 
     lin) into the third place.                                        
                                                                      
   Nirnaith Unoth See Damrod and Diriel.                               
                                                                      
   Ossiriath  (of  the  Seven  rivers)  This form  is not  found else- 
     ' where.  It is  written over  Assariad, which  occurs in  Q $14, 
     later emended  to Ossiriand  (note 4).  Ossiriand(e) is  found as 
     a rejected alternative to  Broseliand in  Canto I  of the  Lay of 
     Leithian (III. 158 - 60). The  placing of  the name,  between the 
     sixth and seventh rivers, is  odd, but  in view  of 'of  the Seven 
     rivers' probably not significant.                                 
                                                                      
   Rathlorion This is the form of the new name of Ascar found          
     in Q ($14), later emended to Rathloriel.                          
                                                                      
  Sarn Athra See Dwarf-road. In Q 514 Sarn-athra, emended               
    to Sarn-athrad (note 8).                                            
                                                                      
  Sons of Feanor See entry Aglon to the northern half of the          
   main map.                                                          
                                                                      
  Thalos  This, the second of the tributaries of Gelion, is named      
     in an addition to Q $14 (note 4). Its course and relation to 
     the mountains and the other rivers was not changed.      
                                                                      
                                                                      

 

                                 V.                                
                                                                  
                           THE AMBARKANTA.                         
                                                                  
 This very short work, of cardinal  interest (and  not least  in the 
 associated maps), is entitled at the beginning of the text  'Of the 
 Fashion of the World', on  a title-page  loose from  but obviously 
 belonging with the work is written:                               
                                                                  
                             Ambarkanta.                           
                                                                  
                       The Shape of the World.                     
                                                                  
                               Rumil.                              
                                                                  
 together with the word Ambarkanta in tengwar. This is the first   
 appearance of Rumil since the Lost Tales; but he is not men-      
 tioned in the text itself.                                        
  That the Ambarkanta is later than the Quenta (perhaps by         
 several years) cannot be doubted. The reappearance of the         
 name Utumna is an advance on Q, where also the term               
 'Middle-earth' does not appear; Eruman is (aberrantly) the        
 name in Q of the land where Men awoke (pp. 119, 205),             
 whereas in the Ambarkanta its name is for the first time          
 Hildorien; and there are several cases where the Ambarkanta       
 has names and details that are only found in Q by emendation      
 (for example, Elvenhome p. 289, but Bay of Faerie > Bay of        
 Elvenhome in Q (II), p. 186 note 12).                             
  The text consists of six pages of fine manuscript in ink, with 
 very little emendation; I give the final forms throughout, with 
 all rejected readings in the notes that follow the text. Closely 


173 

 associated with the work and here reproduced from the origi-      
 nals are three diagrams of the World, here numbered I, II, and 
 III, and two maps, numbered IV and V (see insert). On the         
 pages facing these reproductions I note changes made to           
                                                                  
              

 

 names. The text begins with a list of cosmographical words,        
 with explanations; this I give on pp. 294 - 6.                     
                                                                  
                    OF THE FASHION OF THE WORLD.                   
                                                                  
    About all the World are the Ilurambar, or Walls of the          
 World. They are as ice and glass and steel, being above all 
 imagination  of  the  Children  of  Earth  cold,  transparent, and 
 hard.  They  cannot  be  seen, nor  can they  be passed,  save by 
 the Door of Night.                                                 
    Within  these  walls the  Earth is  globed: above,  below, and 
 upon all  sides  is  Vaiya,  the  Enfolding  Ocean.  But  this is 
 more  like to  sea below  the Earth  and more  like to  air above 
 the Earth.  In  Vaiya   below  the   Earth  dwells   Ulmo.  Above 
 the Earth  lies  the Air,  which is  called Vista,(1) and sustains 
 birds  and  clouds.  Therefore  it is  called above  Fanyamar, or 
 Cloudhome;  and  below  Aiwenore (2) or Bird-land.  But  this air 
 lies only  upon  Middle-earth  and  the   Inner  Seas,   and  its 
 proper  bounds  are  the  Mountains  of Valinor  in the  West and 
 the  Walls  of  the  Sun  in  the  East.  Therefore  clouds  come 
 seldom  in  Valinor,  and the  mortal birds  pass not  beyond the 
 peaks  of  its  mountains.  But  in  the  North and  South, where 
 there  is  most  cold  and  darkness  and   Middle-earth  extends 
 nigh to  the  Walls  of  the  World, Vaiya  and Vista  and Ilmen' 
 flow together and are confounded.                                 
   Ilmen is  that air  that is  clear and  pure being  pervaded by 
 light though it gives no light.  Ilmen lies  above Vista,  and is 
 not great in  depth, but  is deepest  in the  West and  East, and 
 least in the North and South. In  Valinor the  air is  Ilmen, but 
 Vista  flows  in  at  times  especially  in  Elvenhome,  part  of 
 which is at the  eastern feet  of the  Mountains; and  if Valinor 
 m  darkened and  this air  is not  cleansed by  the light  of the 
 Blessed  Realm,   it  takes   the  form   of  shadows   and  grey 
 mists.  But Ilmen  and Vista  will mingle  being of  like nature, 
 but Ilmen  is  breathed  by the  Gods, and  purified by  the pas- 
 sage  of  the  luminaries;  for  in  Ilmen  Varda   ordained  the 
 courses of the stars, and later of the Moon and Sun.              
    From Vista there is no outlet  nor escape  save' for  the ser- 

 

 vants  of  Manwe,  or  for such  as he  gives powers  like to 
 those of his people, that can sustain themselves in  Ilmen or 
 even in the upper Vaiya, which  is very  thin and  cold. From 
 Vista  one  may  descend  upon  the  Earth.  From  Ilmen  one 
 may descend  into Valinor.  Now the  land of  Valinor extends 
 almost to Vaiya, which is most  narrow in  the West  and East 
 of  the  World,  but  deepest  in  the  North and  South. The 
 Western  shores  of Valinor  are therefore  not far  from the 
 Walls  of  the  World.  Yet  there is  a chasm  which sunders 
 Valinor from Vaiya, and it is filled with Ilmen, and  by this 
 way  one  may  come  from  Ilmen  above  the  earth   to  the 
 lower  regions,  and  to  the Earthroots,  and the  caves and 
 grottoes that are at the foundations of  the lands  and seas. 
 There  is Ulmo's  abiding-place. Thence  are derived  the wa- 
 ters  of  Middle-earth.  For these  waters are  compounded of 
 Ilmen  and  Vaiya  and  Ambar' (which  is Earth),  since Ulmo 
 blends  Ilmen  and  Vaiya  and  sends  them  up  through  the 
 veins  of  the  World  to  cleanse and  refresh the  seas and 
 rivers, the  lakes and  the fountains  of Earth.  And running 
 water  thus  possesses  the  memory  of  the  deeps  and  the 
 heights,  and  holds  somewhat  of  the  wisdom and  music of 
 Ulmo, and of the light of the luminaries of heaven.          
   In  the  regions of  Ulmo the  stars are  sometimes hidden, 


174 

 and  there  the  Moon  often  wanders  and  is not  seen from 
 Middle-earth. But the Sun  does not  tarry there.  She passes 
 under the earth in haste,  lest night  be prolonged  and evil 
 strengthened; and she is  drawn through  the nether  Vaiya by 
 the servants of Ulmo, and it is warmed and filled  with life. 
 Thus  days  are  measured by  the courses  of the  Sun, which 
 sails from  East to  West through  the lower  Ilmen, blotting 
 out the stars; and she passes over the midst  of Middle-earth 
 and halts not, and she bends her  course northward  or south- 
 ward,  not  waywardly  but  in  due  procession  and  season. 
 And when she rises above  the Walls  of the  Sun it  is Dawn, 
 and  when she  sinks behind  the Mountains  of Valinor  it is 
 evening.                                                     
   But  days are  otherwise in  Valinor than  in Middle-earth. 
 For there the  time of  greatest light  is Evening.  Then the 

 

                         
                                                                 
 Sun  comes  down  and  rests for  a while  in the  Blessed Land, 
 lying  upon the  bosom of  Vaiya. And  when she  sinks into 
 Vaiya  it is  made hot  and glows  with rosecoloured  fire, and 
 this for a long while illumines  that land.  But as  she passes 
 toward  the  East  the glow  fades, and  Valinor is  robbed of 
 light,  and  is  lit  only with  stars; and  the Gods  mourn then 
 most for the death of Laurelin. At  dawn the  dark is  deep in 
 Valinor,  and  the shadows  of their  mountains lie  heavy on 
 the mansions  of the  Gods. But  the Moon  does not  tarry in 
 Valinor, and passeth swiftly o'er  it to  plunge in  the chasm 
 of Ilmen,(5) for he pursues  ever after  the Sun,  and overtakes 
 her  seldom,  and  then  is  consumed  and  darkened   in  her 
 flame.  But  it  happens at  times that  he comes  above Valinor 
 ere the Sun has left it, and  then he  descends and  meets his 
 beloved, and Valinor is filled with mingled light as  of silver 
 and  gold;  and the  Gods smile  remembering the  mingling of 
 Laurelin and Silpion long ago.                                 
                                                                 
   The Land of Valinor slopes downward from the feet of 
 the Mountains, and its western shore is at the level of the 
 bottoms of the inner seas. And not far thence, as has been 
 said, are the Walls of the World; and over against the west- 
 ermmost shore in the midst of Valinor is Ando Lomen (6) the 
 Door of Timeless Night that pierceth the Walls and opens 
 upon the Void. For the World is set amid Kuma, the Void, 
 the Night without form or time. But none can pass the 
 chasm and the belt of Vaiya and come to that Door, save 
 the great Valar only. And they made that Door when Melko 
 was overcome and put forth into the Outer Dark; and it is 
 guarded by Earendel. 
                                                                 
   The Middle-earth lies amidst the World, and is made of 
 land and water; and its surface is the centre of the world 
 from the confines of the upper Vaiya to the confines of the 
 nether. Of old its fashion was thus. It was highest in the 
 middle, and fell away on either side into vast valleys, but 
 rose again in the East and West and again fell away to the 
 chasm at its edges. And the two valleys were filled with the 

 

  primeval water, and the shores of these  ancient seas  were in 
  the  West  the  western highlands  and the  edge of  the great 
  land, and in the East the  eastern highlands  and the  edge of 
  the  great  land upon  the other  side. But  at the  North and 
  South it did  not fall  away, and  one could  go by  land from 
  the  uttermost  South  and the  chasm of  Ilmen to  the utter- 
  most  North  and  the  chasm  of Ilmen.  The ancient  seas lay 
  therefore in troughs, and their waters spilled not to the East 
  or to the West; but  they had  no shores  either at  the North 
  or at the South, and they  spilled into  the chasm,  and their 
  waterfalls  became  ice  and  bridges  of  ice because  of the 
  cold;  so  that  the  chasm  of  Ilmen  was  here  closed  and 


175 

  bridged, and the  ice reached  out into  Vaiya, and  even unto 
  the Walls of the World.                                        
                                                                
    Now it  is said  that the  Valar coming  into the  World de- 
  scended  first  upon  Middle-earth at  its centre,  save Melko 
  who  descended in  the furthest  North. But  the Valar  took a 
  portion of land and made an  island and  hallowed it,  and set 
  it  in  the Western  Sea and  abode upon  it, while  they were 
  busied in the exploration and first ordering of the  World. As 
  is  told  they  desired to  make lamps,  and Melko  offered to 
  devise  a new  substance of  great strength  and beauty  to be 
  their pillars. And  he set  up these  great pillars  north and 
  south of the Earth's middle yet nearer to  it than  the chasm; 
  and  the  Gods  placed  lamps  upon  them  and  the  Earth had 
  light for a while.                                             
    But  the  pillars were  made with  deceit, being  wrought of 
  ice; and they melted, and the  lamps fell  in ruin,  and their 
  light was spilled. But the melting of the  ice made  two small 
  inland seas, north and south of the middle  of the  Earth, and 
  there was a northern  land and  a middle  land and  a southern 
  land. Then the  Valar removed  into the  West and  forsook the 
  island;  and  upon  the highland  at the  western side  of the 
  West  Sea  they  piled  great   mountains,  and   behind  them 
  made  the  land  of  Valinor.  But  the  mountains  of Valinor 
  curve  backward,  and  Valinor  is broadest  in the  middle of 
  Earth, where the mountains march  beside the  sea; and  at the 

 

  north  and  south  the  mountains  come  even  to  the  chasm. 
  There are those  two regions  of the  Western Land  which are 
  not of Middle-earth and  are yet  outside the  mountains: they 
  are dark  and  empty.  That to  the North  is Eruman,  and that 
  to the South is Arvalin; and there is only a narrow strait be- 
  tween  them  and the  corners of  the Middle-earth,  but these 
  straits are filled with ice.                                   
    For their further protection the  Valar thrust  away Middle- 
  earth at the centre and crowded  it eastward,  so that  it was 
  bended, and the  great sea  of the  West is  very wide  in the 
  middle, the widest of all waters  of the  Earth. The  shape of 
  the Earth in  the East  was much  like that  in the  West, save 
  for the narrowing  of the  Eastern Sea,  and the  thrusting of 
  the land thither. And beyond  the Eastern  Sea lies  the East- 
  ern Land, of which we  know little,  and call  it the  Land of 
  the Sun;  and  it  has  mountains,  less  great than  those of 
  Valinor, yet very great, which are  the Walls  of the  Sun. By 
  reason of the falling of  the land  these mountains  cannot be 
  descried, save by highflying birds, across the seas  which di- 
  vide them from the shores of Midd1e-earth.                     
    And  the  thrusting  aside  of  the  land caused  also moun- 
  tains  to appear  in four  ranges, two  in the  Northland, and 
  two in the Southland;  and those  in the  North were  the Blue 
  Mountains in the West side,  and the  Red Mountains  in the 
  East  side;  and  in  the  South were  the Grey  Mountains and 
  the  Ye11ow.  But Melko  fortified the  North and  built there 
  the  Northern  Towers, which  are also  called the  Iron Moun- 
  tains,  and  they  look  southward.  And  in  the  middle land 
  there  were  the  Mountains  of  the  Wind,  for  a  wind blew 
  strongly  there  coming  from  the  East  before the  Sun; and 
  Hildorien  the  land  where  Men   first  awoke   lay  between 
  these  mountains  and  the  Eastern  Sea. But  Kuivienen where 
  Orome found the Elves  is to  the North  beside the  waters of 
  Helkar.(7)                                                     
                                                                
    But the symmetry of the ancient Earth was changed and        
  broken in the first Battle of the Gods, when Valinor went      
  out  against  Utumno,(8) which  was  Melko's   stronghold,  and 

 

 Melko was chained.  Then the  sea of  Helkar (which  was the                   
 northern lamp) became an inland sea or  great lake,  but the                   
 sea of Ringil (which was the southern  lamp) became  a great                   


176 

 sea flowing north-eastward and joining  by straits  both the                   
 Western and Eastern Seas.                                                      
   And  the  Earth  was  again broken  in the  second battle,                   
 when Melko  was again  overthrown, and  it has  changed ever                   
 in the wearing and passing of many ages.' But  the greatest.                   
 change  took  place,  when the  First Design  was destroyed,                   
 and the Earth was  rounded, and  severed from  Valinor. This                   
 befell in the days of  the assault  of the  Numenoreans upon                   
 the land of the Gods, as is told in the Histories. And since                   
 that time the world has forgotten the  things that  were be-                   
 fore, and  the names  and the  memory of  the lands  and wa-                   
 ters of old has perished.                                                      
                                                                               
                                     NOTES.                                     
                                                                               
 1. Vista: at all  seven occurrences  the original  name Wilwa  was changed, 
     first in pencil then in ink, to Vista; so also on the world-diagrams I and 
     II, and on the diagram III (the World Made Round).                          
 2. Original reading Aiwenor; so also on diagram I.                          
 3. Ilmen:  at  all  the  many occurrences  the original  name Silma  was care- 
     fully  erased  and  changed  to  Ilma  (the  same change  on the  map IV); 
     Ilma  was then  itself altered  to Ilmen  (the same  succession of changes 
     on diagrams I and II).                                                     
 4. Ambar  is  an  emendation  but  the  underlying word  is wholly  erased (so 
     also on diagram II; written in later on I).                                
 5. In the margin is written Ilmen-assa, changed from Ilman-assa.                
 6. Ando Lomen is interpolated into the text,  but in  all probability  not sig- 
     nificantly later than the original writing of the MS.                      
 7. The  last  two  sentences  of  this  paragraph  (from  'And  in  the middle 
     land...')  were  added,  but  to all  appearance belong  in time  with the 
     original writing of the MS.                                                
 8. Utumno is emended from Utumna.                                               
 9. The  original  MS  ends  here;  what  follows,  concerning  the  Earth Made 
     Round  at the  time of  the assault  of the  Numenoreans, was  added later 
     (see p. 309).                                                              
                                                                               
            I give now the list of cosmological words accompanying the          
                Ambarkanta. My father made several changes to this list, but 

 

  since the alterations were mostly made over erasures  and the                 
  additions belong to the same period it  is impossible  to know                 
  the original form of the list in all points. The changes in the                 
  list are however much the same as  those made  in the  text of                 
  the Ambarkanta  and on  the world-diagrams;  thus Silma  > Ilma                 
  >  Ilmen,  Wilwa  >  Vista,  Aiwenor  > Aiwenore;  ava, ambar,                 
  Endor  over  erasures;  Avakuma,  & Elenarda  Stellar Kingdom                 
  additions. The translation of Ilmen as 'Place of light'  is an                 
  emendation from 'sheen'.                                                       
                                                                                
   Ilu The World.                                   World.                       
                                                                                
     Ilurambar The Walls of the World;                                           
     ramba wall                                                                  
                                                                                
   Kuma darkness, void                           Dark.                           
     ava outer, exterior; Avakuma                                                
                                                                                
     Vaiya fold, envelope. In nature like to Outer Sea, or Encircling            
     water, but less buoyant than air, and Ocean, or Enfolding Ocean             
     surrounding The Outer Sea.*                                                 
                                                                                
     Ilmen Place of  light. The  region above    Sky. Heaven                     
     the air,  than which  it is  thinner and                                    
     more  clear.  Here  only  the  stars and                                    
     Moon  and  Sun  can  fly.  It  is called                                    
     also  Tinwe-malle  the   Star-street,  &                                    
     Elenarda Stellar Kingdom.                                                   
                                                                                
     Vista  air.  Wherein  birds may  fly and    Air                             


177 

     clouds   sail.   Its  upper   region  is                                    
     Fanyamar    or   Cloudhome,    and   its                                    
     lower Aiwenore' or Birdland.                                                
                                                                                
   ambar Earth. ambar-endya or Middle Earth                                      
   Earth of which Endor is the midmost                                           
   point.                                                                        
                                                                                
  (* This is  very confusing,  since Vaiya  is apparently  said to  surround the 
  Outer Sea (though  in the  right-hand column  it is  itself defined  as 'Outer 
  Sea'). But the word 'The' in 'The Outer Sea' has a capital T; and I think that 
  my father left the preceding sentence  unfinished, ending  with 'surrounding', 
  and that he added 'The Outer Sea' afterwards as a  definition of  Vaiya, with- 
  out noticing that the preceding phrase was incomplete.)                        

 

 ear water; sea.  Sea                                                            
   The roots of the Earth are Mar-                                               
   talmar, or Talmar Ambaren.                                                    
                                                                                
 ando door, gate.                                                                
                                                                                
 lome Night. Ando Lomen the Door of                                             
 Night,  through  which   Melko  was                                             
 thrust after the Second War  of the                                             
 Gods.                                                                           
                                                                                
 All that land that lies above water, between the Seas of the                    
 West and East and the Mountains of North and South is                           
 Pelmar, the Enclosed Dwelling.                                                  
                                                                                
                         Commentary on the Ambarkanta.                           
                                                                                
 This   elegant   universe,   while   certainly   in   many  respects   an  ev- 
 olution   from   the   old   cosmology   of   the   Lost  Tales,   shows  also 
 radical shifts and advances in essential structure.                             
  To   begin   from   the   Outside:   beyond   the   Walls   of    the   World 
 lies   'the   Void,   the   Night   without   form   or   time',   Kuma  (Ava- 
 kuma);   and   this   is   of   course   an   aboriginal    conception,   'the 
 outer  dark',  'the  limitless  dark',  'the  starless  vast'  of the  tale of 
 The   Hiding   of   Valinor   (I.    216).   The    Walls   of    the   World, 
 Ilurambar,*   are   the    unbroken,   uninterrupted    shell   of    a   vast 
 globe;   they   are   cold,   invisible,   and   impassable   save   by   Ando 
 Lomen,   the   Door   of   Night.   This   Door   was   made   by   the  Valar 
 'when    Melko    was    overcome    and    put    forth   into    the   Outer 
 Dark',   and   Earendel  guards   it.  Already   in  S   ($19)  it   was  said 
 that   'Morgoth   is   thrust   through   the   Door   of   Night   into   the 
 outer  dark  beyond   the  Walls   of  the   World,  and   a  guard   set  for 
 ever   on   that   Door',  this   is  repeated   in  the   corresponding  pas- 
 sage   in   Q,   where   the   same   expressions   are   used   as   in   the 
 Ambarkanta,    'the    Door    of   Timeless    Night',   'the    Void',   and 
 where   Earendel,   sailing   in   the   Void,  is   named  as   the  guardian 
 (see  pp.  197,  248).  It  is  not  however  said  in  these  texts  that the 
                                                                                
 (*Ilu is 'the World' in diagrams I  and II,  and is  so defined  in the  list of 
 words (p. 295); for its early meaning see I. 255, entry Ilwe. - The  changes to 
 Earambar in diagrams I and II, like the pencilled note at the bottom of I, were 
 made very much later and do not concern us here.)                               

 

  Door  of  Night  was  made   when  Melko   was  overcome,   at  the 
  end of the Great Battle.                                            
    I have remarked earlier (p. 57 - 8) on the great shift in the as- 
  tronomical  myth  introduced in  S by  the passage  of the  Sun be- 
  neath  the  Earth,  rather  than  departure  through  the  Door of 
  Night  followed by  the journey  through the  Outer Dark  and re- 
  turn through  the  Gates  of  Morn,  as  described  in  The  Hiding of 
  Valinor;  in  that  account  the  Gods  made the  Door of  Night in 
  order  that  the  Sunship  should  not  have  to pass  beneath the 
 Earth. Thus  the  Door  of  Night  has  remained,  but  its purpose 
 and the time of its making have been totally changed.                


178 

    The  conception  of  a  great Wall  surrounding the  'World' and 
 fencing  it  against  an  outer  Emptiness  and Darkness  goes back 
 to the beginning; in The Hiding of Valinor it  is called  'the Wall 
 of Things', and Ulmo instructs the Valar that 'Vai  runneth from 
 the  Wall  of  Things  unto  the Wall  of Things  whithersoever you 
 may fare' (I. 214). I have discussed earlier (I. 86)  the possibil- 
 ity that already in the  early cosmology  Vaitya (the  outermost of 
 the three 'airs')  and Vai  (the Outer  Ocean) constituted  'a con- 
 tinuous  enfolding  substance',  and  that the  Ambarkanta 'only 
 makes  explicit  what  was  present  but  unexpressed  in  the Lost 
 Tales', and pointed to the difficulties in this idea. In  the first 
 draft of The Hiding of Valinor  (see I.  221 note  16) the  Wall of 
 Things  was  evidently  imagined, as  I have  said (I.  227), 'like 
 the walls of terrestrial cities, or gardens - walls  with a  top: A 
 "ring-fence" '; the Walls  were lower  in the  East, so  that there 
 was  no  Door  there  corresponding  to  the Door  of Night  in the 
 West,  and  the  Sun  rode  over  the Eastern  Wall. In  the second 
 draft  (I.  216)  the  idea of  the Gates  of Morn  was introduced; 
 but the nature and extent of the Walls  was still  left obscure, 
 and  indeed nothing  else is  said of  them in  the Lost  Tales be- 
 yond  the  statement  that  they  are  'deep-blue'  g. 215).  A re- 
 markable  sentence  in  the  original  tale  of  The  Music  of the 
 Ainur (I. 56) declares that 'the  Ainur marvelled  to see  how the 
 world  was globed  amid the  void and  yet separated  from it'. 
 How this is  to be  interpreted in  the context  of the  Lost Tales 
 I  do  not  know;  but the  sentence was  retained through  all the 
 rewritings of  the Ainulindale  (cf. The  Silmarillion p.  17), and 
 so   became   a   precise   description   of   the  world   of  the 

 

  Ambarkanta,  whatever  my  father's  original  meaning  may  have               
  been.                                                                           
    In a  view of  the close  similarity of  wording between  Q and               
  the  Ambarkanta  on  the  subject  of  the  expulsion   of  Melko               
  through  the  Door  of Night,  mentioned above,  it is  very puz-               
  zling that in the same passage of Q (p. 197) it is said that some               
  think that  he 'creeps  back surmounting  the Wal1s  and visiteth               
  the  world'.  The  fact  that  this  is  only  a  surmise  ('Some               
  say...'),  and  that  the  Prophecy  of Mandos  which immediately               
  follows  declares  that  when  Morgoth  does  return  it  will be               
  through the Door of Night, hardly  explains how  the idea  of his               
  'surmounting  the  Walls'  (in  inescapable contradiction  to the               
  Ambarkanta,  and  negating  the  purpose  of   Earendel's  guard)               
  could arise.*                                                                   
    It  is not  indeed explained  in the  Ambarkanta how  the Valar               
  entered the world at its beginning,  passing through  the impass-               
  able Walls, and perhaps we should not  expect it  to be.  But the               
  central idea at this  time is  clear: from  the Beginning  to the               
  Great  Battle  in  which  Melko  was  overthrown, the  world with               
  all  its  inhabitants was  inescapably bounded;  but at  the very               
  end, in  order to  extrude Melko  into the  Void, the  Valar were               
  able to pierce the Walls by a Door.                                             
                                                                                 
    Wholly new is the conception of  Ilmen as  the pure  air that                 
  is breathed in Valinor, and whose bounds  are the  Mountains of                 
  Valinor and the mountains called the Walls  of the  Sun, beyond                 
  the Eastern Sea, though 'Vista flows in at times  especially in                 
  Elvenhome'.  In  Ilmen  journey  the Sun,  Moon, and  Stars, so                 
  that  this  region  is  called  also Tinwe-malle+  and Elenarda                 
  (translated 'Star-street' and 'Stellar Kingdom' in the  list of                 
  words, p.  295). This  partly corresponds  to the  cosmology of                 
  the Lost Tales, where the Moon-ship 'saileth in the lower folds                 
  of  Ilwe threading  a white  swathe among  the stars',  and the                 
                                                                                 
  (*This  conception  of  the  Walls  reappears much  later, and  is found  in The 
  Silmarillion (p. 36): Melkor, returning to Arda after  his expulsion  by Tulkas 
  into the outer darkness, 'passed over the Walls of the Night with his host, and 
  came to Middle-earth far in the north'. But  this is  an aspect  of intractable 
  problems  arising  in the  later cosmology  that cannot  be entered  into here. 
  + See I. 269 (entry Tinwe Linto) and 263 (entry Olore Malle).)                 


179 

 

  stars 'could not soar into the dark and  tenuous realm  of Vaitya            
  that is  outside  all', but  where the  Sun 'voyageth  even above            
  Ilwe and beyond the stars' (I. 181, 193).                                    
    The  lowest  air,  Vista,  in  which  are  Fanyamar 'Cloudhome'            
  and Ainwenore 'Bird-land', retains  the characteristic  nature of            
  the earlier Vilna; cf. I. 65 'Vilna that is  grey and  therein may            
  the birds fly safely'. But there is an important corollary to the            
  frontier  between  Ilmen  and  Vista  in  the West:  'clouds come            
  seldom  in  Valinor,  and the  mortal birds  pass not  beyond the            
  peaks of its mountains'.                                                     
                                                                              
    An   aspect   of   the   cosmology   that   seems   puzzling   at   first 
  sight  arises  from  the  statements  in  the   Ambarkanta  (1)   that  'in 
  the  North   and   South   ...   Middle-earth    extends   nigh    to   the 
  Walls  of  the  World'  (p.  290),  and  (2)  that  Vaiya  is   'most  nar- 
  row   in  the   West  and   East  of   the  World,   but  deepest   in  the 
  North  and   South'  (ibid.).   This  apparent   contradiction  is   to  be 
  explained   by   the   passage   (p.   292)   describing   how   the  Inner 
  Seas  have  no  shores  at  North   and  South,   hut  spilling   into  the 
  Chasm   of   Ilmen   form   ice   bridges*  that   close  the   chasm,  and 
  the  ice  extends  out  into   Vaiya  and   even  to   the  Walls   of  the 
  World.   This   ice   is   represented    by   the    mountain-like   peaks 
  above  the  words  Tormen   and  Harmen   in  diagram   II.  Of   all  this 
  there  is  no  trace  in  the Lost  Tales; but  it will  be found  that the 
  Ambarkanta    here    greatly    illumines     the    passage     in    The 
  Silmarillion (p. 89) describing the Helcaraxe:                               
                                                                              
    For between the land of Aman that in the north  curved east-               
    ward, and the east-shores of  Endor (which  is Middle-earth)               
    that bore westward, there was a narrow strait, through which               
    the  chill waters  of the  Encircling Sea  and the  waves of               
    Belegaer flowed together, and there were vast fogs and mists               
    of deathly cold, and the sea-streams were filled with clash-               
    ing hills of ice and the grinding of ice deep-sunken.                      
                                                                              
    The passage of the Sun beneath the Earth seems to be dif-                  
  ferently conceived in the Ambarkanta from that of the Moon;                  
                                                                              
  (*Cf. 'Far north lies the bridge of Ice' in the N.W. corner of the Westward 
    Extension of the first 'Silmarillion' map, p. 281; Insert p. iv.)          

 

 for while both pass from East to West through I1men, the Sun                     
 'sinks into Vaiya' and is 'drawn through the nether Vaiya by                     
 the servants  of Ulmo',  whereas the  Moon plunges  into the                     
 Chasm of Ilmen.*                                                                 
                                                                                 
   Turning  now  to  the  surface  of  the Earth,  we meet  for the               
 first time the name Endor,  which does  not occur  in the  text of               
 the Ambarkanta itself, but which  is defined  in the  word-list as               
 'the  midmost  point'  of  Ambarendya  or  Middle-earth.  Endor is               
 marked  in  also on  the 'World-diagrams'  I and  II, and  also on               
 the map  IV, where  it is  shown as  a point,  the 'Earth-middle',               
 and  subsequently  changed  to  Endon.   The  name   Endor  occurs               
 once in The Silmarillion (in the passage just cited), but there it               
 is a name of  Middle-earth, not  of the  midmost point  of Middle-               
 earth;  so  also in  The Lord  of the  Rings (Appendix  E): Quenya               
 Endore,  Sindarin  Ennor  'Middle-earth'.  Ambar-endya   seems  to               
 be  synonymous  with  Pelmar,  since in  the word-list  the former               
 is  defined  as  'Middle-earth', while  on map  IV the  region be-               
 tween  the  two  seas  of  East  and  West  is  called  'Pelmar or               
 Middle-earth', but in diagram I  they are  marked as  if different               
 in reference. Possibly, Pelmar (translated in the list of words as               
 'the  Enclosed  Dwelling') means  strictly the  habitable surface,               
 Ambar-endya the central raised part of Ambar, the Earth.+                       
                                                                                 
 (* The  statement  in  The  Silmarillion (p.  101) that  Tilion (steersman  of the 
 Moon)  'would  pass  swiftly  over  the  western  land...  and  plunge   in  the 
 Chasm  beyond  the  Outer  Sea'  cannot  in  any  way  be  brought  into harmony 


180 

 with  the  Ambarkanta,  where  the  Chasm  of Ilmen  is reached  before Vaiya, 
 and must be so by virtue of the fundamental ideas of the cosmology.              
   The  passage  in the  'Silmarillion' version  that followed  Q and  was inter- 
 rupted at the end of 1937 has: 'But Tilion... passes  swiftly over  the western 
 land... and  plunges into  the chasm  between the  shores of  the Earth  and the 
 Outer  Sea.'  The passage  in the  published Silmarillion  derives from  a later 
 version written in all probability in 1951 - 2; but though I retained it I am at 
 loss                     to                      explain                     it. 
 + For the first  element in  Pelmar see  the Appendix  to The  Silmarillion, en- 
 try   pel-.   Neither   this   name   nor  Ambar,   Ambar-endya  occur   in  The 
 Silmarillion,  but  Ambar-metta  'world-ending' is  found in  The Return  of the 
 King (VI. S). - Middle-earth is first  found in  the Ambarkanta  and in  the An- 
 nals of Valinor, which belong to the same  period but  cannot be  dated relative 
 to one another. - Romen  'East' appears  for the  first time  in diagram  I, and 
 Hyarmen  'South'  and  Formen  'North'  (<  Harmen,   Tormen)  in   diagram  II.) 

 

  The lines  drawn  downwards  from  the  surface   of  the   Earth  to 
  Martalmar  'the roots  of the  Earth' in  diagrams I  and II  are 'the 
  veins of  the  World'  (p.  290);  and this  passage is  important in 
  understanding   Ulmo's   power    and   benign    influence   exerted 
  through  the  waters  of  the  world  (cf.  The  Silmarillion   pp.  27, 
  40,  in  both of  which passages  the expression  'the veins  of the 
  world' is used).                                                      
       In the East of  the world  are the  Walls of  the Sun,  which is 
  a   great   mountain   range   symmetrically   answering   the  Moun- 
  tains of  Valinor  in  the  West,  as  shown  on  map  IV.   Of  this 
  range  there  is  no  mention  in  the  Lost  Tales,  where  almost all 
  that is  said  of  the  East  is  contained  in  Orome's words  to the 
  In   the  East   beyond  the   tumbled  lands   there  is   a  silent 
  beach  and  a  dark  and  empty  sea'  (I.  214); in  the East  also was 
  the great  mountain  Kalorme  (I.  212),  and  there  Aule  and  Ulmo 
  'builded  great  havens  [of  the  Sun  and  Moon] beside  the sound- 
  less  sea'  (I.  215).  In   the  Ambarkanta   the  Gates   of  Morn, 
  through  which  the  Sun  returns  from  the Outer  Dark in  the Lost 
  Tales, have disappeared.                                              
       In  the  description  of  evening  and  dawn  in Valinor  in the 
  Ambarkanta  there  is  an  echo  of  the  Lost  Tales:   'Valinor  is 
  Sled  with  mingled  light  as  of  silver  and  gold;  and  the Gods 
  smile  remembering  the  mingling  of   Laurelin  and   Silpion  long 
  ago',  cf. I.  216 'Then  smile the  Gods wistfully  and say:  "It is 
  the mingling of the lights once more." '                              
       The  extremely  close  symmetry  of  the  Eastern   and  Western 
  lands  as displayed  on map  IV is  striking; the  chief departure 
  from  symmetry  being  the  difference  in  shape  of the  great Seas, 
  and  this  was  due  to  the  eastward  thrusting  or  'crowding'  of 
  Middle-earth - 'so that  it was  bended' -  at the  time of  the mak- 
  ing of Valinor and the raising of its protective mountain-chain. 
  This more than Titanic crushing of the new-made world was 
  the origin of the great mountain ranges of Middle-earth, the 
  Blue, the Red, the Yellow, and the Grey. Cf. The Silmarillion 
  p. 37:                                                                
                                                                       
       And  the  shape  of  Arda  and  the  symmetry  of  its  waters  and 
       its lands was marred in  that time,  so that  the first  designs of 
       the Valar were never after restored.                             

 

  But in The Silmarillion this loss of  symmetry is  not attributed 
  to  the  deliberate  act  of  the  Valar  themselves, who  in the 
  Ambarkanta  are  ready  to  contort the  very structure  of Ambar 
  for the sake of their own security.                               
    There  are some  interesting points  in the  Ambarkanta account 
  of the first days of the Valar in the world. Here it is  said for 
  the  first  time that  Melko 'descended  in the  furthest North', 
  whereas the  Valar, coming  to Middle-earth  at its  centre, made 
  their island from 'a portion of land' and set  it in  the Western 
  Sea.  The  old  story  of Melko's  treacherous assistance  of the 
  Valar in their works  by devising  the pillars  of the  Lamps out 
  of ice is still present, despite the wording of S, and still more 
  of  Q  ($1):  'Morgoth  contested  with  them  and made  war. The 


181 

  lamps  he  overthrew  ...', which  seems to  suggest that  it had 
  been  abandoned.  In  the  tale of  The Coming  of the  Valar the 
  name Ringil was  given (by  Melko!) to  the northern  pillar, and 
  Helkar  to  the  southern (I.  69); in  the Ambarkanta  the names 
  are applied to the Lamps rather than the pillars, and  Ringil be- 
  comes that of the southern, Helkar that of  the northern.  In the 
  tale there is no mention of the formation of  Inland Seas  at the 
  time of  the fall  of the  Lamps; rather  'great floods  of water 
  poured  from  [the  Lamps]  into  the  Shadowy  Seas',   and  'so 
  great was their thaw that whereas those seas were at first  of no 
  great  size  but clear  and warm,  now were  they black  and wide 
  and vapours lay upon  them and  deep shades,  for the  great cold 
  rivers that poured into  them' (I.  70). Later  the names  of the 
  Lamps  were  changed   more  than   once,  but   Helcar  remained 
  the name  of the  Inland Sea  'where aforetime  the roots  of the 
  mountain  of  Illuin [the  northern Lamp]  had been'  (The Silma- 
  rillion p. 49), and it is seen from the Ambarkanta that  the idea 
  of  the  sea  being  formed where  the Lamp  once stood  owed its 
  origin to the melting pillar of ice, although the actual story of 
  Melko's  devising  of the  pillars was  abandoned when  it became 
  impossible  to  represent  Melko as  co-operative, even  in seem- 
  ing, with the Valar. There is no mention  in The  Silmarillion of 
  a southern sea where the other Lamp had stood.                    
    Kuivienen is said in  the Ambarkanta  to be  'to the  North be- 
  side  the waters  of Helkar',  as shown  on map  IV. In  the Lost 
  Tales (I. 115, 117) Koivie-neni was a  lake (with  'bare margin', 

 

                                                             
                                                                   
 in  a  vale  'surrounded  by  pine-clad  slopes') in  Palisor, the 
 midmost region;  in The  Silmarillion it  is 'a  bay in  the Inland 
 Sea  of  Helcar'  (p.  49).  In  the same  passage Orome,  on that 
 that  led  him  to  the  finding  of the  Elves, 'turned  north by 
 the shores  of  Helcar  and  passed  under  the  shadows  of the 
 Orocarni, the  Mountains of  the East',  and this  agrees perfectly 
 map   IV   (Orocarni   Red   Mountains,   see   the   Appendix  to 
 The Silmarillion   entry   caran).   The  Blue   Mountains  oppose 
 them symmetrically  in the  West; and  in the  South are  the Grey 
 Mountains  and  the  Yellow,  again  symmetrically  opposed  both 
 to each  other  and  to  the  northern  ranges.  The  hack  of the 
 March  of  the  Elves as  marked on  map IV  is again  in complete 
 ment   with   The  Silmarillion   (p.  53):   'passing  northwards 
 about the  Sea  of  Helcar  they  turned towards  the west',  but of 
 the  Misty  Mountains  (Hithaeglir) and  the Great  River (Anduin) 
 where many  Elves  of  the  Third  Host  turned  away   South  (ibid. 
 p.  54)  there  is  no sign.  In The  Hobbit and  The Lord  of the 
 Rings  the  Grey  Mountains  (Ered  Mithrin)  are a  range beyond 
 Mirkwood in the North of Middle-earth.                             
                                                                   
   It seems that Beleriand,  to judge  by the  placing and  size of 
 the  lettering  of  the  name on  map IV,  was relatively  a very 
 snall region; and the EIves reached the  Sea to  the south  of it, 
 at the Falasse (later the Falas of Beleriand). But my father cir- 
 cled 'Beleriand' in pencil  and from  the circle  drew an  arrow to 
 the point where the  track of  the March  reached the  Sea, which 
 probably implies  that he  wished to  show that  this was  in fact 
 within the confines of Beleriand.                                 
   The  name  Hildorien  of  the  land  where  Men  awoke (implying 
 Hildor, the Aftercomers) now first appears; for the curious use of 
 the  name  Eruman  for  this  land  in Q  see pp.  119 -  20, 205. 
 Hildorien is a land lying between  the Mountains  of the  Wind and 
 the Eastern Sea; in The Silmarillion (p. 103)  it is  placed, more 
 vaguely, 'in the eastward regions of Middle-earth'.                
   The   placing   of   Utumna  (in   the  Ambarkanta   emended  to 
 Utumno,  note  8)  on map  IV is  notable, as  is also  the occur- 
 rence  of  the  name  itself.  Whereas  in  the Lost  Tales Melko's 
 first fortress  was  Utumna,   and  his   second  Angband   (see  I. 
 198),  in  S  and  Q the  original fortress  is Angband,  to which 

 


182 

  Melko  returned after  the destruction  of the  Trees (see  p. SO), 
  and  Utumna  is  not  mentioned  in  those  texts.  My  father  had 
  now  reverted  to  Utumna  (Utumno)  as  the  name  of  Melko's an- 
  cient and original dwelling in Middle-earth  (see further  below, 
  p. 307).                                                           
                                                                    
    The  archipelagoes  in  the  Western  Sea  have  undergone  the 
  great change  and simplification  that distinguishes  the account 
  in The Silmarillion from that in the Lost Tales (see  II. 324-5); 
  there is no sign on the map of the Harbourless Isles or  the Twi- 
  lit  Isles,  and  instead  we  have   'The  Enchanted   or  Magic 
  Isles' - in Q II $17 Magic  Isles is  emended to  Enchanted Isles 
  (note  11). The  'Shadowy Isles'  lying to  the northward  of the 
  Enchanted Isles on the map seem to be a new conception.            
    The  name  Eldaros  (not Eldamar,  see I.  251) appears  on map 
  IV  with  the  meaning  'Elvenhome'.  Eldaros  has  occurred once 
  previously, in one of the AElfwine' outlines (II.  301): 'Eldaros 
  or AElfham', where the reference is  unclear, but  seems to  be to 
  Tol  Eressea.  The  words  'Bay  of Elfland'  are written  on the 
  map but no bay is indicated.                                       
    In  the  West  the  symmetrically  formed  lands of  Eruman and 
  Arvalin  between  the  Mountains  and  the  Sea  now  appear; for 
  the earlier history see I. 83. Tun lies a little to the  north of 
  Taniquetil; and the position of Valmar is as it was on the little 
  ancient map given in I. 81.                                        
                                                                    
    In  the  Ambarkanta  something  is  said  of  the  vast further 
  changes in the shape of  the lands  and seas  that took  place in 
  'the first Battle  of the  Gods', when  Melko was  taken captive, 
  concerning  which  there  is nothing  in Q  ($2) beyond  a refer- 
  ence to the 'tumult'. In The Silmarillion (p. 51) this  is called 
  'the Battle of the Powers', and                                    
                                                                    
    In that time the shape of Middle-earth was changed, and the. 
    Great  Sea  that  sundered  it  from  Aman  grew  wide  and deep; 
    and  it  broke in  upon the  coasts and  made a  deep gulf  to the 
    southward. Many lesser bays were made between the Great          
    Gulf  and  Helcaraxe  far  in the  north, where  Middie-earth and 
    Aman came nigh together. Of these the Bay of Balar was           

 

                
                                                                   
 the  chief;  and  into  it  the mighty  river Sirion  flowed down 
 from  the  new-raised   highlands  northwards:   Dorthonion,  and 
 the mountains about Hithlum.                                       
                                                                   
 The  text  of  the  Ambarkanta  does  not  mention the  Great Gulf 
 or the Bay of Balar, but speaks  rather of  the vast  extension of 
 the  sea  of Ringil  and its  joining to  the Eastern  and Western 
 Seas (it is not clear why it is said that the  sea of  Helkar 'be- 
 came an inland sea or great lake', since it  was so  already). But 
 on the back  of the  map IV  is another  map (V)  that illustrates 
 all the  features of  both accounts.  This map  is however  a very 
 rapid pencil sketch, and is in places difficult to interpret, from 
 uncertainty as to  the meaning  of lines,  more especially  in the 
 Western  Lands  (Outer Lands).  It is  very hard  to say  how pre- 
 cisely this map should be interpreted in relation  to map  IV. For 
 example,  in  map  IV  the  Grey  Mountains  are very  widely sep- 
 arated from the  Blue, whereas  in map  V there  is only  a narrow 
 space  at  the head  of the  Great Gulf  between them;  the Inland 
 Sea  (Helkar)  is further  to the  North; and  so on.  Again, many 
 features are  absent (such  as the  Straits of  Ice), and  in such 
 cases one cannot be sure whether  their absence  is casual  or in- 
 tentional; though the failure to mark  in Tol  Eressea or  the En- 
 chanted Isles suggests  the former.  I am  inclined to  think that 
 map V is a very rough sketch not to be interpreted too strictly. 
 The   narrow   ring  between   the  Earth   and  the   Outer  Seas 
 clearly represents the Chasm of Ilmen.                             
 In  relation  to  Beleriand  in  the  North-west,  and  bearing in 


183 

 mind   the   whole  underlying   history  of   Eriol-AElfwine  and 
 Leithien (England),  the southern  part of  the Hither  Lands, be- 
 low  the  Great  Gulf, bears  an obvious  resemblance to  the con- 
 tinent of Africa;  and in  a vaguer  way the  Inland Sea  could be 
 interpreted  as the  Mediterranean and  the Black  Sea. But  I can 
 offer nothing on this matter that  would not  be the  purest spec- 
 ulation.                                                           
 The  sea  marked  'East  Sea'  on  map  V  is  the  former  sea of 
 Ringil,-  cf.  the  Ambarkanta:  the  sea of  Ringil ...  became a 
 great sea flowing northeastward  and joining  by straits  both the 
 Western and Eastern Seas.'                                         
 In  the  North-west  the  ranges  of  Eredlomin   and  Eredwethrin 

 

  (not   named;  see   pp.  233-4)   enclosing  Hithlum   (which  is            
  named)  are  shown,  and  the  western  extension  of  Eredwethrin            
  that was the southern fence of later Nevrast.*  In the  version of            
  'The Silmarillion' that followed Q it is said that  in the  War of            
  the  Gods  the  Iron  Mountains  'were  broken  and  distorted  at            
  their   western   end,   and   of   their   fragments   were  made            
  Eredwethrin  and  Eredlomin',  and that  the Iron  Mountains 'bent            
  back northward', and map  V, in  relation to  map IV,  agrees well            
  with this. The first 'Silmarillion' map (see insert), on  the oth-            
  er  hand,  shows  the  Iron  Mountains  curving  back  strongly to            
  the North-east (it is conceivable that the  hasty zigzag  lines to            
  the east of Thangorodrim were intended to rectify this).                      
    In the version of 'The Silmarillion' just referred to it is also            
  said that  'beyond the  River Gelion  the land  narrowed suddenly,            
  for the Great Sea ran into a  mighty gulf  reaching almost  to the            
  feet of Eredlindon,  and there  was a  strait of  mountainous land            
  between  the  gulf  and  the inland  sea of  Helcar, by  which one            
  might come into the vast  regions of  the south  of Middle-earth'.            
  Again,  these  features  are  clearly  seen  on  map V,  where the            
  'strait of mountainous land' is called the 'Straits of the World'.            
  The enclosed areas to the  east of  Eredwethrin and  south-east of            
  Thangorodrim   clearly   represent   the    Encircling   Mountains            
  about  Gondolin  and  the  highlands   of  Taur-na-Fuin;   we  see            
  what  was  later  called  the  Gap of  Maglor between  those high-            
  lands  and the  Blue Mountains,  and the  rivers Gelion  (with its            
  tributaries, the rivers  of Ossiriand),  Sirion, and  Narog.+ With            
  this part of map V compare  the first  'Silmarillion' map  and its            
  Eastward extension.                                                           
    Particularly notable is  the closeness  of Hithlum  on map  V to            
  the edge of the world (the Chasm of Ilmen).                                   
    Angband  is  placed  in  very  much  the  same  position  on map            
  V  as  is  Utumna  on  map  IV: very  near to  the Chasm  of Ilmen            
  and  well  behind the  mountain-wall, in  the land  that on  map V            
                                                                               
  (*This  range  is  seen  also  on   the  Westward   Extension  of   the  first 
  'Silmarillion' map (see insert).                                              
   + A11 these north-western features  are drawn  in ink,  whereas the  rest of 
  map V is in pencil; but the mountain-ranges (though not the rivers) are inked 
  in over pencil.)                                                              

 

                     
                                                                              
 is called  Daidelos  (later  Dor  Daedeloth).*  As  noted above,                 
 Utumna had  now  been  resurrected  from  the  Lost  Tales  as                 
 Melko's original fortress; and it emerges clearly  from later                 
 texts  that the  story now  was that  when Melko  returned to                 
 Middle-earth after the destruction of the Trees he returned to                 
 the ruins of Utumna and built there his new  fortress, Angband.                 
 This,  I  think,  is why  the fortress  is called  Angband, not                 
 Utumna, on map V.                                                             
  The history was therefore as follows:                                        
                                                                              
  Lost Tales.  Utumna.      Melko's original fortress.                               
               Angband.     His dwelling when he re-                               
                                          turned.                              
                                                                              


184 

  S,Q.          Angband.    Melko's original fortress to                           
                                                                              
                                   which he returned.                   
                                                                              
  Ambarkanta.    Utumna.    Melko's original fortress.           
  maps.          Angband.   His  second  fortress  built  on         
                              the  site  of   Utumna  when         
                              he returned.                         
                                                                              
 Much  later, Utumno  and Angband  were both  ancient fotresses                
 of Morgoth, and  Angband was  that to  which he  returned (The                
 Silmarillion pp. 47, 81).                                                     
  Thangorodrim is shown on map V as a  point, set  slightly out                
 from the Iron Mountains. This represents a  change in  the con-                
 ception of Thangorodrim from that on the  first 'Silmarillion'                
 map, which illustrates the words of  S ($8)  that Thangorodrim                
 is 'the highest of  the Iron  Mountains around  Morgoth's for-                
 tress'.  The  marking  of  Thangorodrim  on  Ambarkanta  map  V                
 Shows the later conception, seen in  The Silmarillion  p. 118,                
 where it is said expressly that Melkor made a tunnel under the                
 tnountains which issued south of  them, that  Thangorodrim was                
 piled above the gate of issue, and that Angband was behind the                
                                                                              
 (* Similar forms but with different application have  occurred earlier:  in the 
 Epilogue to the Lost Tales the High Heath in Tol Eressea where the battle was 
 fought  is  Ladwen-na-Dhaideloth,  Dor-na-Dhaideloth  ('Sky-roof'),  II. 287; 
 and in line 946 of the Lay of the Children of Hurin Dor-na-Fauglith was first 
 called Daideloth ('High plain'), III. 49.)                                    

 

 mountain-wall:  thus  Thangorodrim   stood  out   somewhat  from 
 the main range.                                                   
                                                                  
   There  are  extremely  puzzling  features  in the  Western Land 
 on map V.  There is  now a  mountain chain  (for so  the herring- 
 bone markings must be  interpreted, since  that is  their meaning 
 elsewhere  on  the  map)  extending up  the western  coast north- 
 wards from Taniquetil to the  Helkarakse and  (as it  seems) ris- 
 ing out of the  sea, as  well as  the old  westward curve  of the 
 Mountains  of  Valinor  (bending  back  to  the  Chasm  of Ilmen) 
 seen on map IV;  thus Eruman  (with the  first occurrence  of the 
 name  Araman pencilled  above it  afterwards) is  not represented 
 as  a coastal  wasteland between  the mountains  and the  sea but 
 is  walled in  by mountains  both on  the East  and on  the West. 
 I do not understand this; in  any case  The Silmarillion  has the 
 geography shown on map IV.                                        
   Equally puzzling is the  representation of  the lands  south of 
 Tun and Taniquetil.  Here there  are herring-bone  lines continu- 
 ing  the  main  line  of  mountains  southwards  from Taniquetil, 
 with again  the old  westward curve  back to  the Chasm;  but the 
 area  symmetrically  corresponding  to  Eruman  in  the  North is 
 here  left  unnamed,  and  Arvalin   (emended  from   Eruman)  is 
 shown  as a  substantial land  extending east  even of  the 'new' 
 mountains, from the southern  shore of  the Bay  of Faery  to the 
 extreme South of the world. The  Bay of  Faery, which  is clearly 
 shown on this  map (in  contrast to  map IV),  is in  fact partly 
 formed by this 'new' Arvalin.  In a  corner of  the map  is writ- 
 ten:                                                              
                                                                  
   After  the War  of the  Gods (Arvalin  was cast  up by  the Great 
   Sea at the foot of the Mts.                                     
                                                                  
 Though the brackets are not closed after 'Mts.', I think that the 
 first words may  have been  intended as  a title,  indicating the 
 period  represented  by the  map. But  the following  words, cou- 
 pled  with  the  absence of  Arvalin from  its expected  place on 
 the map, seem to imply  that it  was only  now that  Arvalin came 
 into being.                                                       
                                * * *                              

 


185 

                 
                                                                 
  The  Old  English  names  Ingarsecg,  Utgarsecg  are  found  in 
 the Old English texts (pp. 253,  256). Aflon  on the  coast north 
 of Tun is Alqualonde (later Sindarin alph, lond (lonn):  see the 
 Appendix to The Silmarillion, entries  alqua, londe).  The names 
 Aman,  Araman  were  added  to map  V many  years later  (as also 
 Arda, Earambar on the diagrams).                                 
                                                                 
  If this map shows the vastness  of the  cataclysm that  my fa- 
 ther conceived as having taken place at the  time of  the break- 
 ing  of Utumno  and the  chaining of  Melko, at  the end  of the 
 Ambarkanta he added (see note  9) a  passage concerning  the far 
 greater cataclysm that took place 'in the days of the assault of 
 the  Numenoreans  upon  the  land  of the  Gods'. This  may have 
 been added much later; but the passage  is written  carefully in 
 ink, not scribbled in pencil, and is far more likely to  be con- 
 temporary, since the story of Numenor arose about this  time. In 
 support of this is the diagram III, 'the  World after  the Cata- 
 clysm and  the  ruin of  the Numenoreans';  for on  this diagram 
 the  inner  air  was  originally  marked  Wilwa and  only later 
 changed to Vista. In  the Ambarkanta  and the  accompanying list 
 of words, as in diagrams I and II, Vista is likewise  an emenda- 
 tion from Wilwa; it seems therefore that diagram III  belongs to 
 the same period.                                                 

 

 

 

                                  VI.                                 
                                                                     
                        THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF                        
                                VALINOR.                              
                                                                     
 I refer  to this  work as  the 'earliest'  Annals of  Valinor because 
 it  was  followed  later  in  the  1930s  by  a  second  version, and 
 then,  after  the  completion  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  and very 
 probably  in  1951  - 2,  by a  third, entitled  The Annals  of Aman, 
 which  though  still  a  part  of the  continuous evolution  of these 
 Annals  is  a  major  new  work,  and  which  contains  some  of  the 
 finest prose in all the Matter of the Elder Days.                    
  These  earliest  Annals  of  Valinor  are   comprised  in   a  short 
 manuscript  of  nine  pages  written  in  ink. There  is a  good deal 
 of  emendation  and  interpolation,  some   changes  being   made  in 
 ink and probably  not much  if any  later than  the first  writing of 
 the  text, while  a second  layer of  change consists  of alterations 
 in faint and rapid  pencil that  are not  always legible.  These lat- 
 ter  include  two  quite  substantial  passages  (given  in  notes 14 
 and   18)   which   introduce   wholly   new    material   concerning 
 events in Middle-earth.                                              
  The text  that follows  is that  of the  Annals as  originally writ- 
 ten,  apart  from  one  or two  insignificant alterations  of wording 
 that are taken up silently, and all  later changes  are given  in the 
 numbered  notes,  other  than   those  made   to  dates.   These  are 
 many  and  complex  and  are  dealt  with  all  together, separately, 
 at the end of the notes.                                             
  It  is  certain  that  these  Annals  belong to  the same  period as 
 the  Quenta,  but  also  that they  are later  than the  Quenta. This 
 is  seen  from  the  fact  that  whereas  in  Q  Finrod (=  the later 
 Finarfin)  returned  to  Valinor  out  of  the  far  North  after the 
 burning of the ships, and the later story of his return  earlier, af- 
 ter  the  Prophecy of  the North,  is only  introduced in  a marginal 
 note  ($5  note  8  and  commentary  p.  204),  in  the   Annals  the 

 

  later story is already embodied in the text (Valian  Year 2993). 
  The Annals  have  Beleriand,  whereas  Q,  as  far  as  $12, had 
  Broseliand  emended  to  Beleriand;  they  have   several  names 
  that do  not  occur  in  Q,  e.g.  Bladorion,  Dagor-os-Giliath, 
  Drengist,  Eredwethion  (this  only   by  later   emendation  in 
  Q);  and  Eredlomin  has its  later sense  of the  Echoing Moun- 


186 

  tains, not  as in  Q and  on the  first map  of the  Shadowy Moun- 
  tains (see pp. 233-4). I see no way of  showing that  the Annals 
  are later, or earlier, than the Ambarkanta, but the matter seems 
  of no importance; the two  texts certainly  belong to  very much 
  the same time.                                                   
    Following  my  commentary  on  the Annals,  which I  shall re- 
  fer to as 'AV', I give the Old English versions in  an appendix. 
                                                                  
                         ANNALS OF VALINOR.                        
                                                                  
  (These   and   the   Annals   of   Beleriand  were   written  by 
  pengolod the Wise  of Gondolin,  before its  fall, and  after at 
  Sirion's Haven, and  at Tavrobel  in Tol  Eressea after  his re- 
  turn  unto  the  West, and  there seen  and translated  by Eriol 
  of Leithien, that is AElfwine of the Angelcynn.)                 
                                                                  
                  Here begin the Annals of Valinor.                
                                                                  
         0  At  the  beginning  Iluvatar, that  is 'Allfather', 
            made  all  things, and  the Valar,  that is  the 'Pow- 
            ers',   came   into   the   World.  These   are  nine, 
            Manwe,    Ulmo,    Aule,    Orome,    Tulkas,    Osse, 
            Mandos,   Lorien,   and   Melko.   Of    these   Manwe 
            and  Melko   were  most   puissant  and   were  breth- 
            ren,  and  Manwe  was  lord  of  the  Valar  and holy; 
            but  Melko  turned  to  lust  and  pride  and violence 
            and evil, and  his name  is accursed,  and is  not ut- 
            tered,  but  he  is  called  Morgoth.  The  spouses of 
            the   Valar   were  Varda,   and  Yavanna,   who  were 
            sisters;  and  Vana;  and the  sister of  Orome, Nessa 
            the  wife  of  Tulkas;(1) and Uinen  lady of  the Seas; 

 

 and  Nienna  sister  of   Manwe  and   Melko;  and 
 Este.  No  spouse  hath   Ulmo  or   Melko.(2) With 
 them came many lesser spirits, their  children, or 
 beings of their own kind but of less  might; these 
 are the Valarindi.                                
                                                  
   Time  was counted  in the  world before  the Sun 
 and Moon  by the  Valar according  to ages,  and a 
 Valian age  hath 100  of the  years of  the Valar, 
 which are each as ten years are now.              
                                                  
   In  the  Valian Year  500: Morgoth  destroyed by 
 deceit the Lamps (3) which Aule  made for  the light- 
 ing  of the  World, and  the Valar,  save Morgoth, 
 retired to the  West and  built there  Valinor be- 
 tween the Outer Seas that  surround the  Earth and 
 the Great Seas of the West, and  on the  shores of 
 these they piled great  mountains. But  the symme- 
 try  of  land and  sea was  first broken  in those 
 days.(4)                                            
                                                  
   In the Valian Year 1000,  after the  building of 
 Valinor,  and  Valmar  the city  of the  Gods, the 
 Valar brought into being the  Two Trees  of Silver 
 and  of   Gold,  whose   bloom  gave   light  unto 
 Valinor.                                          
   But  all  this  while Morgoth  had dwelt  in the 
 Middle-earth  and  made  him  a great  fortress in 
 the North of the World; and  he broke  and twisted 
 the Earth much in that time.(5)                     
                                                  
   A thousand Valian Years of  bliss and  glory fol- 
 lowed  in  Valinor,  but  growth  that   began  on 
 Middle-earth  at  the  lighting  of the  Lamps was 
 checked.  To  Middle-earth  came  only   Orome  to 
 hunt in the dark woods of  the ancient  Earth, and 
 sometimes Yavanna walked there.                   


187 

 

   The  Valian  Year  2000  is accounted  the Noon- 
 tide of the Blessed Realm, and the full  season of 
 the mirth  of the  Gods. Then  did Varda  make the 
 stars (6) and set them aloft, and thereafter  some of 
 the Valarindi strayed  into the  Middle-earth, and 
 among  them  was  Melian,  whose  voice   was  re- 
 nowned  in  Valmar. But  she returned  not thither 
 for  many  ages, and  the nightingales  sang about 
 her in the dark woods of the Western Lands.       
                                                  
   At the first shining of the  Sickle of  the Gods 
 which Varda set (7) above  the North  as a  threat to 
 Morgoth and an omen of his  fall, the  elder chil- 
 dren  of  Iluvatar  awoke  in  the midmost  of the 
 World:  they  are  the  Elves.(8) Orome  found them 
 and befriended them; and the  most part  under his 
 guidance  marched  West  and  North to  the shores 
 of  Beleriand,  being  bidden   by  the   Gods  to 
 Valinor.                                          
   But  first  Morgoth  in  a  great war  was bound 
 and  made  captive   and  imprisoned   in  Mandos. 
 There  he  was  confined  in  punishment  for nine 
 ages (900 Valian Years)(9) until he sought  for par- 
 don. In that war the lands were rent  and sundered 
 anew.(10)                                            
   The Quendi (11) and  the Noldoli  were the  first to 
 reach Valinor, and upon  the hill  of Kor  nigh to 
 the strand  they built  the city  of Tun.  But the 
 Teleri  who came  after abode  an age  (100 Valian 
 Years)  upon  the  shores  of Beleriand,  and some 
 never  departed  thence.  Of  these  most renowned 
 was  Thingol  (Sindingul)(12) brother of  Elwe, lord 
 of  the  Teleri,  whom  Melian  enchanted.  Her he 
 after  wedded and  dwelt as  a king  in Beleriand, 
 but this was after  the departure  of most  of the 
 Teleri,  drawn  by  Ulmo  upon Tol  Eressea.(13) This 
 is the Valian Years 2000 to 2100.                 

 

    From  2100  to  2200  the  Teleri  dwelt  on Tol 
 Eressea in the  Great Sea  within sight  of Valinor, 
 in 2200 they came  in their  ships to  Valinor, ang 
 dwelt  upon  its  eastern  strands, and  there they 
 made   the   town   and   haven  of   Alqalonde  or 
 'Swan-haven',   so   called   because   there  were 
 moored their swan-shaped boats.                     
                                                    
    About  2500  the  Noldoli  invented   and  began 
 the fashioning of  gems; and  after a  while Feanor 
 the  smith,  eldest  son  of  Finwe  chief  of  the 
 Noldoli,  devised  the   thrice-renowned  Silmarils 
 concerning  the  fates of  which these  tales tell. 
 They shone of  their own  light, being  filled with 
 the radiance of the  Two Trees,  the holy  light of 
 Valinor, blended to a marvellous fire.(14)           
                                                    
    In  2900  Morgoth  sued for  pardon, and  at the 
 prayers of Nienna his sister,  and by  the clemency 
 of  Manwe  his  brother,  but  against  the  wish o 
 Tulkas  and  Aule,  he  was  released,  and feigned 
 humility  and  repentance,  obeisance to  the Valar 
 and  love and  friendship for  the Elves,  and dwelt 
 in Valinor in ever-increasing freedom. But he lied 
 and   dissembled,   and   most   he    cozened   the 
 Noldoli,  for  he  had  much to  teach, and  they had 
 an over-mastering  desire to  learn; but  he coveted 
 their gems and lusted for the Silmarils.            
                                                    
  2900  During  two  more ages (15) Valinor abode  yet in 


188 

  bliss, yet a  shadow of  foreboding began  to gather 
  in  many  hearts;  for  Morgoth  was  at   work  with 
  secret whisperings  and cunning  lies; and  most he 
  worked,  alas,  upon  the  Noldoli,  and  sowed the 
  seeds  of  dissension  between  the  sons  of Finwe, 
  Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finrod, and of  distrust be- 
  tween  Noldoli  and  Valar.  2950  By  the  doom of 
  the  Gods  Feanor,  eldest  son  of Finwe,  and his 

 

           
                                                              
         household   and  following   was  deposed   from  the 
         leadership  of  the  Noldoli  -  wherefore  the house 
         of  Feanor  was  after  called the  Dispossessed, for 
         this  and  because  Morgoth  after  robbed   them  of 
         their treasure  - and  the Gods  sent also  to appre- 
         hend   Morgoth.   But   he   fled   into   hiding  in 
         Arvalin, and plotted evil.(16)                        
                                                              
 2990-1. Morgoth   now   completed   his   designs   and  with 
         the  aid  of  Ungoliante  out  of Arvalin  stole back 
         into Valinor,  and destroyed  the Trees,  escaping in 
         the  gathering  dark   northward,  where   he  sacked 
         the dwellings of Feanor,  and carried  off a  host of 
         jewels,  among  them  the  Silmarils;  and   he  slew 
         Finwe  and  many  Elves  and  thus   defiled  Valinor 
         and   began   slaughter   in   the    World.(17) Though 
         hunted  by  the Valar  he escaped  into the  North of 
         the  Hither  Lands   and  re-established   there  his 
         stronghold,  and  bred  and  gathered  once  more his 
         evil servants, Orcs and Balrogs.(18)                  
                                                              
         2991 Valinor lay now in great gloom,  and darkness, 
         save only for the stars, fell on all the World. But 
         Feanor against the  will of  the Valar  returned to 
         Tun  and claimed  the kingship  of the  Noldoli af- 
         ter  Finwe,  and he  summoned to  Tun all  the peo- 
         ple  of  that  kindred. And  Feanor spoke  to them, 
         and  his  words  were  filled  with  the   lies  of 
         Morgoth,  and  distrust of  the Valar,  even though 
         his  heart was  hot with  hate for  Morgoth, slayer 
         of his father and robber of his gems.                 
         The  most  of  the  Noldoli (19) he persuaded  to fol- 
         low  him out  of Valinor  and recover  their realms 
         on earth, lest they be filched by the younger chil- 
         dren  of  Iluvatar, Men  (herein he  echoed Morgoth 
         unwitting);  and  war for  ever on  Morgoth seeking 
         to recover their treasure.  At that  meeting Feanor 
         and his sons swore their dreadful  oath to  slay or 

 

 pursue any  soever that  held a  Silmaril against 
 their will.                                       
                                                  
 2992  The  march began,  though the  Gods forbade 
 (and yet hindered not), but under divided leader- 
 ship, for  Fingolfin's house  held him  for king. 
 Long  was  the  people  preparing.  Then  it came 
 into Feanor's heart that riever should that great 
 host, both warriors and other, and store of goods 
 make  the vast  leagues unto  the North  (for Tun 
 beneath  Taniquetil  is  upon  the Girdle  of the 
 Earth,  where  the  Great Seas  are measurelessly 
 wide) save with the help of ships. But the Teleri 
 alone had ships, and they would not yield or lend 
 them against the will of the Valar.               
   Thus  about  2992  of  Valian Years  befell the 
 dreadful  battle  about  Alqalonde, and  the Kin- 
 slaying  evilly  renowned  in  song,   where  the 
 Noldoli distraught furthered Morgoth's  work. But 


189 

 the Noldoli  overcame the  Teleri and  took their 
 ships,  and  fared slowly  north along  the rocky 
 coasts in great peril and hardship and  amid dis- 
 sensions.                                         
                                                  
   In 2993 it is said they came  to a  place where 
 a high rock  stands above  the shores,  and there 
 stood either  Mandos or  his messenger  and spoke 
 the  Doom  of  Mandos.  For  the  kin-slaying  he 
 cursed the house of Feanor, and to a  less degree 
 all who followed them or shared in their emprise, 
 unless they would  return to  abide the  doom and 
 pardon of the Valar. But if they would  not, then 
 should evil fortune and disaster befall them, and 
 ever from treachery of kin towards kin; and their 
 oath should turn against them, and a measure of  
 mortality should visit them, that they  should be 
 lightly slain with weapons, or torments,  or sor- 
 row,  and  in the  end fade  and wane  before the 

 

         
                                                    
 younger  race.  And  much  else he  foretold darkly 
 that  after  befell,  warning  them that  the Valar 
 would fence Valinor against their return.(20)       
  But  Feanor  hardened  his  heart  and   held  on, 
 and so also but  reluctantly did  Fingolfin's folk, 
 feeling the constraint of their kindred and fearing 
 for  the  doom  of  the  Gods   (for  not   all  of 
 Fingolfin's house  had been  guiltless of  the kin- 
 slaying).  Felagund  and the  other sons  of Finrod 
 went  forward  also, for  they had  aforetime great 
 fellowship,  Felagund with  the sons  of Fingolfin, 
 and  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor  with  Celegorm 
 and Curufin sons of Feanor. Yet  the lords  of this 
 third house were  less haughty  and more  fair than 
 the  others,  and  had  had  no  part  in  the kin- 
 slaying,  and  many  with  Finrod  himself returned 
 unto  Valinor  and  the  pardon  of  the  Gods. But 
 Aule  their  ancient  friend  smiled  on   them  no 
 more, and the Teleri were estranged.                
                                                    
 2994 The Noldoli came to the bitter North, and fur- 
 ther they would not dare, for there is a strait be- 
 tween   the  Western   Land  (whereon   Valinor  is 
 built)  that  curveth  east,  and the  Hither Lands 
 which  bear west,  and through  this the  chill wa- 
 ters of the Outer Seas and the  waves of  the Great 
 Sea  flow  together,  and there  are vast  mists of 
 deathly  cold,  and  the  streams  are  filled with 
 clashing hills of ice and with the grinding  of ice 
 submerged. This strait was named Helkarakse.        
  But  the  ships  that  remained, many  having been 
 lost, were too few to carry all across, and dissen- 
 sions  awoke  between  Feanor  and  Fingolfin.  But 
 Feanor seized the  ships and  sailed east;(21) and he 
 said: 'Let the  murmurers whine  their way  back to 
 the shadows of  Valinor.' And  he burned  the ships 
 upon the eastern shore, and so  great was  its fire 

 

 that the Noldoli left behind  saw its  redness afar 
 off.                                                
                                                    
   Thus  about  2995  Feanor  came   unto  Beleriand 
 and  the  shores  beneath  Eredlomin   the  Echoing 
 Mountains,  and  their  landing  was at  the narrow 
 inlet Drengist  that runs  into Dorlomen.  And they 
 came  thence  into  Dorlomen  and  about  the north 
 of  the  mountains  of Mithrim,  and camped  in the 


190 

 land  of  Hithlum  in  that  part  that   is  named 
 Mithrim and north of the great  lake that  hath the 
 same name.                                          
                                                    
 2996  And  in the  land of  Mithrim they  fought an 
 army  of  Morgoth  aroused by  the burning  and the 
 rumour  of  their advance;  and they  were victori- 
 ous  and drove  away the  Orcs with  slaughter, and 
 pursued  them   beyond  Eredwethion   (the  Shadowy 
 Mountains) into Bladorion. And  that battle  is the 
 First Battle of Beleriand, and is  called Dagor-os- 
 Giliath, the Battle under Stars; for all was as yet 
 dark. But the victory  was marred  by the  death of 
 Feanor,  who  was  wounded  mortally   by  Gothmog, 
 lord  of  Balrogs,  when  he advanced  unwarily too 
 far upon  Bladorion,(22) and Feanor was  borne back 
 to Mithrim and  died there,  reminding his  sons of 
 their  oath.  To  this  they now  added an  oath of 
 vengeance for their father.                         
                                                    
 2997 But Maidros  eldest son  of Feanor  was caught 
 in the snares  of Morgoth.  For Morgoth  feigned to 
 treat  with him,  and Maidros  feigned to  be will- 
 ing,  and either  purposed evil  to the  other, and 
 came  with force  to the  parley; but  Morgoth with 
 the more, and Maidros was made captive.             
   Then  Morgoth  held  him  as  hostage,  and swore 
 only  to  release  him if  the Noldoli  would march 
 away  either  to  Valinor, if  they could,  or from 

 

   
                                                   
 Beleriand and away to the far  South; and  if they 
 would not he would torment Maidros.                
 But  the  Noldoli  trusted not  that he  would re- 
 lease  Maidros  if  they  departed, nor  were they 
 willing  to  do  so whatever  he might  do. Where- 
 fore  in 2998  Morgoth hung  Maidros by  the right 
 wrist  in  a  band  of  hellwrought steel  above a 
 precipice  upon  Thangorodrim,  where  none  could 
 reach him.                                         
                                                   
 Now  it  is told  that Fingolfin  and the  sons of 
 Finrod (23) won their  way  at  last   with  grievous 
 losses  and  with  minished  might into  the North 
 of  the  World.  And   they  came   perforce  over 
 Helkarakse, being unwilling  to retrace  their way 
 to Valinor, and having no  ships; but  their agony 
 in that crossing was very  great and  their hearts 
 were filled with bitterness against Feanor.        
 And  even  as  they  came  the  First Ages  of the 
 World  were  ended;(24) and  these  are  reckoned as 
 30000 years or  3000 years  of the  Valar; whereof 
 the first Thousand was before  the Trees,  and Two 
 Thousand  save  nine  were Years  of the  Trees or 
 of the Holy Light, which lived after and lives yet 
 only in the Silmarils. And the Nine are  the Years 
 of Darkness or the Darkening of Valinor.           
                                                   
 But  towards  the  end  of this  time as  is else- 
 where  told  the  Gods  made  the  Sun   and  Moon 
 and  sent  them  forth over  the World,  and light 
 came  unto  the  Hither  Lands.(25) And   Men  awoke 
 in the East of the World even at the first Dawn.(26) 
 But  with  the first  Moonrise Fingolfin  set foot 
 upon  the  North;  for the  Moonrise came  ere the 
 Dawn,  even   as  Silpion   of  old   bloomed  ere 
 Laurelin and was the elder of  the Trees.  But the 
 first Dawn shone upon  Fingolfin's march,  and his 


191 

 banners blue and silver  were unfurled,  and flow- 

 

   ers sprang beneath his marching feet, for a time                   
   of opening and growth was come into the Earth,                     
   and good of evil as ever happens.                                  
       But Fingolfin marched through the very fast.                   
   ness of Morgoth's land, Dor-Daideloth (27) the Land                    
   of Dread, and the Orcs fled before the new light                   
   amazed, and hid beneath the earth; and the Elves                   
   smote upon the gates of Angband and their trum-                    
   pets echoed in Thangorodrim's towers.                              
       They came thus south unto Mithrim, and little                  
   love (28) was there between them and the house o                       
   Feanor; and the folk of Feanor removed and                         
   camped upon the southern shores, and the lake                      
   lay between the peoples. And from this time are                    
   reckoned the Years of the Sun, and these things                    
   happened in the first year. And after came mea-                    
   sured time into the World, and the growth and                      
   change and ageing of all things was thereafter                     
   more swift even in Valinor, but most in the                        
   Hither Lands,(29) the mortal regions between the                      
   Seas of East and West. And what else happen                        
   is recorded in the Annals of Beleriand, and in the                 
   Pennas or Qenta, and in many songs and tales.                      
                                                                     
                                NOTES.                                
                                                                     
1. Added here in pencil: daughter of Yavanna.                         
2. This passage, from and Nienna..., was emended in pencil to read: 
 and Vaire; and Este. No spouse hath Ulmo or Melko or Nienna,         
 Manwe's sister and Melko's.                                          
3. Cf. the title to the Ambarkanta map IV (see insert): The World about 
 V.Y. 500 after the fall of the Lamps.                                 
4. But the symmetry of land and sea was first broken in those days is an 
 addition, but was probably made at the time of writing of the text. Cf. 
 pp. 301 - 2 and the citation from The Silmarillion given there.      
5. and he broke and twisted the Earth much in that time is another 
 dition probably made at the time of writing.                         
6. The paragraph to this point was emended in ink to read: But on a 
 time (1900) Varda began the making of the stars... The sentence      
 The Valian Year 2000 is accounted the Noontide of the Blessed        

 

                                         
                                                                           
     Realm, and the full season of the mirth of the Gods was removed to 
     a later point: see note 10.                                            
 7.  Added here in ink: last and (i.e. the Sickle of the Gods which Varda 
     set last and above the North).                                         
 8.  Added here in ink: Hence are they called the children of the stars, 
 9.  nine ages (900 Valian Years) emended in ink to seven ages (700         
     Valian Years).                                                         
 10. At this point the sentence The Valian Year 2000... was reintroduced 
     (see note 6).                                                          
 11. Quendi > Lindar in pencil.                                             
 12. Sindingul > Tindingol in pencil.                                       
 13. Added here in pencil: His folk looked for him in vain, and his sleep 
     lasted till they had gone.                                             
 14. Added here in pencil:                                                  
                                                                           
      2700   Here   the   Green-elves   or  Laiqi   or  Laiqeldar   came  to 
      Ossiriand at length  after many  wanderings and  long sojourns  in di- 
      verse  places. It  is told  that a  company of  the Noldoli  under Dan 
      forsook the host of Finwe  early in  the march  and turned  south, but 
      again  finding  the  lands  barren  and  dark  turned north,  and they 
      came  about  2700  over  Eredlindon  under  Denithor  son of  Dan, and 
      dwelt in Ossiriand, and they were allies of Thingol.                  
                                                                           
     The name Denithor is an emendation, probably of Denilos (see           


192 

     note 18).                                                              
 15. This second entry for 2900 was written after the first was changed to 
     2700 (see note 9, and the note on dates below).                        
 16. This passage was emended and extended thus in pencil:                  
                                                                           
      ... robbed them of their treasure.  But Morgoth  hid himself  in the 
      North  of  the  land, as  was known  only to  Finwe and  Feanor, who 
      dwelt now apart.                                                      
      2950  The  Gods  sent  to apprehend  Morgoth, but  he fled  over the 
      mountains into Arvalin, and plotted evil for a long while, gathering 
      the strength of darkness into him.                                    
                                                                           
     The date 2950 earlier in the paragraph was struck out at the same      
     time.                                                                  
 17. Added here in pencil: This reward got Finwe for his friendship. 
 18. Added here in ink:                                                     
                                                                           
      Then  fear  came  into  Beleriand,  and Thingol  made his  mansions in 
      Menegroth,  and  Melian wove  magics of  the Valar  about the  land of 
      Doriath, and the most of the  Elves of  Beleriand withdrew  within its 
      protection,   save  some   that  lingered   in  the   western  havens, 
      Brithombar and Eglorest, beside the Great Seas.                       

 

  To this was added, in faint and hasty pencil:                           
                                                                         
       and  the  remnant  of  the  Green-elves  of  Ossiriand  behind  the riv- 
       ers  and  the  might  of  Ulmo.  But  Thingol with  his ally  Denilos of 
       the  Green-elves  kept  the  Orcs  for a  while from  the South.  But at 
       length Denilos son of Dan was slain, and Thingol                   
                                                                         
  Here the  pencilled note  ends abruptly.  Above -los  of Denilos  at the 
  first occurrence is an alternative  reading, illegible,  but in  view of 
  Denithor probably < Denilos in note 14, no doubt -thor.                 
 19. Noldoli emended from Gnomes at the time of writing.                  
 20. Added  here  in  pencil: Here  endeth that  which Rumil  wrote. See 
  p. 348.                                                                 
 21. Added here in ink: with  all his  folk and  no others  save Orodreth, 
  Angrod, and Egnor, whom Celegorm and Curufin loved;                     
 22. Added here in pencil: but he... duel and Feanor fell wrapped in fire. 
 23. Fingolfin and  the sons  of Finrod  emended in  ink to  Fingolfin and 
  Felagund (cf. note 21).                                                 
 24. Added here in pencil: for they had tarried long  in despair  upon the 
  shores of the West. The next sentence begins: And these...              
 25. Added here in pencil: But the Moon was the first to set sail.         
 26. Sun-rise written in pencil above Dawn.                                
 27. Dor-Daideloth is  an emendation  in ink  of (almost  certainly) Dor- 
  Daidelos; cf. the Ambarkanta map V, and p. 307.                         
 28. This sentence  emended in  pencil to  read: Then  being wary  of the 
  wiles  of  Morgoth  they turned  unto Mithrim,  that the  Shadowy Moun- 
  tains should be their guard. But little love...                         
 29. Added in pencil; of Middle-earth.                                      
                                                                         
                    Note on changes made to the dates.                    
            (i) Dates in the period up to the Valian Year 2200.           
                                                                         
 The   mention  of   the  Noontide   of  the   Blessed  Realm   was  dis- 
 placed  (notes  6  and  10)  in  order  to   date  the   starmaking  and 
 other    events   earlier    than   2000.    The   beginning    of   the 
 starmaking  was  then  dated  1900   (note  6),   and  against   At  the 
 first  shining  of  the  Sickle  of  the  Gods was  written in  the date 
 1950.  Against  the  march  of  the  Elves  led   by  Orome   was  writ- 
 ten  in  1980  -   1990;  and   against  the   arrival  of   the  Quendi 
 (Lindar) and Noldoli in Valinor 2000.                                    
 In  the  sentence  But  the  Teleri   who  came   after  abode   an  age 

 

                       
                                                                  
 (100  Valian  Years)  upon  the  shores  of  Beleriand  the  words 
 an  age  were  struck  out,  100  changed  to  10, and  the dates 


193 

 2000-2010   written   in.  In   the  sentence   This  is   the  Valian 
 Years 2000  to  2100  the  second  date  was  likewise  changed to 
 2010.                                                             
   In  the  concluding  part  of the  period, by  pencilled changes 
 perhaps later than  the foregoing,  the dates  of the  dwelling of 
 the Teleri  on  Tol  Eressea,  originally   2100  to   2200,  were 
 changed  to  2010  to  2110;  and  the  coming  of  the   Teleri  to 
 Valinor  in  2200  was  changed  to  2111.  The  result  of these 
 changes may be shown in a table:                               
                                                                  
   Original.      After.                                           
   Annals.       changes.                                          
                                                                  
    2000          1900      Making of the stars by Varda begun.                   
                                                                  
                  1950      Making of the Sickle of the Gods            
                              (end of the starmaking).              
                                                                  
                1980 - 1990 March of the Elves.                     
                                                                  
    2000          2000      Noontide of the Blessed Realm.                        
                                                                  
                  2000      Coming of the first two kindreds of 
                              the Elves to Valinor.                 
                                                                  
 2000-2100      2000-2010   Teleri on the shores of Beleriand.      
 2100-2200      2010-2110   Teleri dwelling in Tol Eressea.           
     2200         2111      Coming of the Teleri to Valinor.            
                                                                  
        (ii) Dates in the period from the Valian Year 2900.         
                                                                  
 The  year  2900,  in  which  Morgoth   sued  for   pardon,  was 
 Changed to 2700, following the change in the length of  his im- 
 prisonment  from  nine  to seven  ages (900  to 700  Valian Years) 
 e  earlier  (note  9).  These  changes   must  have   been  made 
 while the Annals were in progress, in view of the second entry 
 for 2900 that follows  in the  text as  written, During  two more 
 ages Valinor  abode yet  in bliss,  i.e. two  more ages  from the 

 

  emended  date,  2700,  when  Morgoth  sued   for  pardon   and  was 
  released.                                                          
    For the shifting of the date 2950 see note 16.                   
    Almost  all  the  dates from  2990 -  1 to  the end  were emended 
  in pencil, and the results are best set out in a table.  (The dates 
  given  in  the  text  as  2992 to  2995 are  themselves emendations 
  in ink,  apparently in  each case  advancing the  date by  one year 
  from that originally written.)                                     
    The  sentence  Thus  about  2992  of  Valian  Years (p.  316) was 
  changed  to  Thus  in  the  dread  Year  of  the Valar  2999 (29991 
  S.Y.), where S.Y.= Sun Year; cf. the opening of the Annals, 
  where it is explained that  a Valian  Year was  equal to  ten years 
  'now', i.e. of the Sun.                                            
    It will be seen that the  effect of  the later  pencilled changes 
  given  in the  table below  was to  speed up  events from  the Bat- 
  tle  of  Alqualonde to  the landing  of Fingolfin  in Middle-earth, 
  so that they extend over  only a  single Valian  Year. In  the pas- 
  sage  giving  the  reckoning  of  the  First  Ages  of   the  World 
  (p.  319),  over  nine  in  Two  Thousand save  nine were  Years of 
  the Trees my  father wrote  one; this  one year  is the  dread Year 
  of the Valar 2999.                                                 
    In this table, only actual  pencilled changes  made to  the dates 
  are recorded. The  change of  2991 to  2998 -  3000 is  intended to 
  cover all that follows, or refers only to the beginning of  the en- 
  try:  Valinor  now  lay  in  great gloom,  and darkness...  fell on 
  all the World.                                                     
                                                                    
       Original Annals.                          After changes.      
                                                                    
  (Valian Years).                              (Valian.   (Sun.      


194 

                                                Years).   Years).      
                                                                    
     2900 - 1     Destruction of the Trees       2998              
                  and escape of Morgoth                               
                                                                    
     2991         Rebellion of Feanor         2998-3000           
                                                                    
     2992       Preparation for the Flight       2999              
                  of the Noldoli                                     
                                                                    
     2992         The Battle of Alqualonde       2999       29991                      

 

                           
                                                                    
   Original Annals.                             After changes.         
                                                                    
 (Valian Years).                             (Valian.     (Sun.     
                                              Years).     Years). 
                                                                    
  2993           The Doom of Mandos.                      29992 
                                                                    
  2994           The Noldoli in the far                   29994 
                 North; the burning of the                             
                 ships.                                                
                                                                    
  2995           The landing of the                       29995 
                 Feanorians and the                                    
                 encampment in Mithrim.                                
                                                                    
  2996           The Battle under Stars and.     Date siruck out       
                 the death of Feanor.                                  
                                                                    
  2997           Capture of Maidros.                      29996 
                                                                    
  2998           Maidros hung from                                             
                 Thangorodrim.                                          
                                                                    
  3000           Landing of Fingolfin.                                          
                                                                    
            Commentary on the Annals of Valinor.                   
                                                                    
 In the  preamble  to  the Annals  of Valinor  (AV) we  meet one 
 Pengolod  the  Wise  of Gondolin,  who dwelt  at Tavrobel  in Tol 
 Eressea  'after  his   return  unto   the  West'.   Pengolod  (or 
 Pengolod)  often appears  later, but  nothing more  is told  of his 
 history  (the reference  to Sirion's  Haven shows  that he  was one 
 Of  those  who  escaped  from  Gondolin  with  Tuor  and  Idril).  I 
 am much inclined to think that his  literary origin  is to  be found 
 Gilfanon   of   the  Lost   Tales,  who   also  lived   at  Tavrobel 
 (which  now  first  emerges  again);  there  Eriol  stayed   in  his 
 house  ('the  house  of  a  hundred  chimneys'),  and  Gilfanon bade 
 him  write  down  all  that  he had  heard (II.  283), while  in the 
 Preamble  to  AV  Eriol   saw  Pengolod's   book  at   Tavrobel  and 
 translated  it  there.  Moreover  Gilfanon  was  of  the  Noldoli,  and 
 though  in  the  Lost  Tales he  is not  associated with  Gondolin he 

 

  was  an  Elf  of  Kor,  'being  indeed one  of the  oldest of  the fair- 
  ies  and  the  most  aged  that  now dwelt  in the  isle', and  had live 
  long  in  the  Great  Lands  (I.  175);  while   Pengolod  was   also an 
  Elf  whose  life  began  in  Valinor,  since  he  'returned'   into  the 
  West.                                                                    
    It  is  not  clear  whether  the  ascription  of  both sets  of Annals 
  to   Pengolod   of  Tavrobel,   where AElfwine/Eriol   translated  them, 
  is  a  departure  from  or  is congruent  with the  title of  the Quenta 
  (p.  94),  in  which  Eriol  is  said  to  have  read  the  Golden  Book 
  (Parma  Kuluina)  in  Kortirion.  In  the   early  notes   and  outlines 
  there  are  different  conceptions  of  the  Golden  Book: see  II. 287, 
  290  -  1,  310.  On  the  explicit  equation of  AElfwine and  Eriol in 
  the preamble to AV see p. 252.                                           


195 

    On   the  later   addition  to   AV  (note   20)  'Here   endeth  that 
  which  Rumil  wrote'  see  pp.  348  -  9.  Rumil  re-emerges  from  the 
  Lost Tales also as the author of the Ambarkanta (p. 288).                
                                                                          
    In  the  opening  passage  of  AV,  and   in  the   later  alterations 
  made   to   it,  there   are  some   developments  in   the  composition 
  and  relations  of  the  Valar.  The  Nine  Valar  are  the same  as the 
  nine  'chieftains  of  the  Valar'  or  the 'Nine  Gods' of  the opening 
  section   in  Q;   and  the   association  of   the  Valar   with  their 
  spouses   has   undergone   little   change   from   the   Lost   Tales: 
  Manwe    and    Varda,    Aule    and    Yavanna;   Orome    and   Vana; 
  Tulkas   and   Nessa;   Osse   and   Uinen;   Mandos  and   Nienna.  But 
  now  Este  first  appears,  the  spouse  of Lorien  (as is  implied here 
  by  the  arrangement  of  the  passage,  and  as  is   expressly  stated 
  in the Old English version of AV, p. 340).                               
    The  'consanguinity'  of  the  Valar.  In  the  Lost  Tales  Aule  and 
  Yavanna  Palurien  were  the  parents  of  Orome   g.  67),   and  Nessa 
  was  Orome's  sister  (I.  75).  In   the  addition   to  AV   given  in 
  note  1  Nessa  is  still  the  daughter  of  Yavanna;*  as   will  appear 
  subsequently  (p.  349)  Orome  was   the  son   of  Yavanna,   but  not 
  of  Aule.  In  The  Silmarillion   (p.  29)   Orome  and   Nessa  remain 
  brother and sister, though their parentage is not stated.                
    Varda  and  Yavanna  are  said  to  be  sisters  in  Q,  as  in  AV; in 
                                                                          
  (*In Q $6 (p. 120) Nessa is the daughter of Vana, though this statement was 
  struck out (note 2).)                                                     

 

  
                                                                     
 Q Vana is  a third  sister, though  apparently not  so in  AV, and 
 she  remains  the younger  sister of  Yavanna in  The Silmarillion 
 (ibid.).                                                             
    Manwe  and  Melko  are  said in  AV to  be 'brethren'  (cf. The 
 Silmarillion  p.  26:  Manwe  and  Melkor  were  brethren  in  the 
 thought of Iluvatar'), and Nienna is their  sister; in  The Silma- 
 rillion (p.  28) she  is the  sister of  the Feanturi,  Mandos and 
 Lorien.                                                               
    If  these  sources are  combined the  fullest extension  of the 
 genealogy is therefore:                                              
                                                                     
  Este = Lorien. Mandos = Nienna. Melko. Manwe.                           
                                                                     
        Manwe = Varda. Yavanna = Aule.            Vana = Orome.      
                                                                     
              Tulkas = Nessa.    Orome = Vana.                             
                                                                     
  Only   the   sea-gods,  Ulmo,   and  Osse   with  Uinen,   are  not 
  brought in.                                                         
    By the emendation given in note 2 Vaire appears, and is           
  clearly  by  the  arrangement  of  the  passage the  spouse of 
  Mandos,  as  she  remained;  and   Nienna  now   becomes  solitary, 
  again  as she  remained. Of  course it  is altogether  unclear what 
  is really meant by the terms 'brother', 'sister',  'mother', 'son', 
  'children' in the context of the great Valar.                       
    The  term  Valarindi  has  not   occurred  before;   see  further 
  p. 350.                                                             
                                                                     
    In what follows I relate my remarks to the dates of the An-       
  nals. In most respects this text (as originally written) is in har- 
  mony with  the Quenta,  and I  notice only  the relatively  few and 
  for the most part minor points in which they are not, or in        
  Which the Annals offer some detail that is absent from the          
  Quenta (a great deal is of course found in the much longer          
  Quenta that is omitted in the brief Annals).                        

 

  Valian  Year  500  The  words  'Morgoth  destroyed  by  deceit the 
  Lamps' indicates the story of his devising the pillars out of ice, 
  as in the Ambarkanta (see pp. 292, 302).                           
                                                                    


196 

  Valian  Year  2000  (later  1900,  1950) The  making of  the stars 
  seems  still  to be  thought of  as accomplished  by Varda  at one 
  and the same period, as in  Q $2  (see p.  201). A  later addition 
  in AV (note 7) makes the Sickle of  the Gods  the last  of Varda's 
  works  in  the  heavens,  and  thus  the  Elves  awoke   when  the 
  starmaking was concluded,  as in  The Silmarillion  (p. 48);  in S 
  and  Q  they  awoke  'at the  making of  the stars'.  The addition 
  given  in  note  8  telling that  the Elves  were for  this reason 
  called 'the children of the stars' is interesting; but  later evi- 
  dence  shows  that  this  was  not  yet  the  meaning of  the name 
  Eldar.                                                             
    The  Elves  are  said  to  have  awoken 'in  the midmost  of the 
  World', in S and Q Cuivienen is 'in the East', 'far in  the East', 
  as in The Silmarillion. But I doubt that  this is  significant, in 
  view  of  the  placing  of  Kuivienen  on  the  Ambarkanta  map IV 
  (see insert), which could be referred to either  as 'in  the East' 
  or as 'in the midmost of the World'.                               
    In  S  and Q  there is  no mention  of the  Elves who  would not 
  leave  the Waters  of Awakening  (see p.  51); in  AV there  is at 
  least a suggestion of  them in  the reference  to 'the  most part' 
  of the Elves having  followed Orome.  But the  story of  the three 
  original ambassadors of the Elves is still absent (see p. 201). 
    In S  and Q  ($4) the  length of  Morgoth's imprisonment  in the 
  halls  of  Mandos  was  seven ages;  in Q  'seven' was  emended to 
  'nine', but  this was  then rejected  (note 1);  in AV  'nine' was 
  emended  to  'seven'  (note 9).  In The  Silmarillion (p.  65) the 
  number of ages is three.                                           
    The  rending  and  sundering  of  the  lands  in  the  war  that 
  ended  in   the  captivity   of  Morgoth   is  described   in  the 
  Ambarkanta (see pp. 293, 304 - 6).                                 
    The term Quendi for the  First Kindred  is still  used in  AV as 
  in Q, and as in Q  was later  changed to  Lindar. The  addition in 
  note 13  makes it  explicit that  Thingol did  not awake  from his 
  enchanted sleep until his people had  passed over  the Sea;  so in 

 

                                        
                                                                              
 the Tale of Tinuviel, II. 9: 'Now when he awoke he thought no      
 more of his people (and indeed it had been vain, for long now      
 had those reached Valinor).' He is now the brother of Elwe      
 Lord of the Teleri (cf. I. 120).      
                                                                              
 Valian Fear 2200 (later 2111) The name Alqalonde (not in S      
 and Q, where only the English name, Swanhaven or Haven of      
 the Swans, is used) reappears from (Kopas) Alqalunte of the      
 Lost Tales; cf. Alflon on the Ambarkanta map V (p. 309; see      
 also insert).      
    It is to be noticed that while the changing of the dates      
 (p. 323) greatly reduced the time during which the Teleri dwelt      
 on the coast of Beleriand (from 100 Valian Years to 10), it      
 does not affect the length of their sojourn in Tol Eressea, 100      
 Valian Years, equivalent to 1000 Years of the Sun (cf. Q $3;      
 'Of this long sojourn apart came the sundering of the tongue      
 of the Foamriders and the Elves of Valinor'),      
                                                                              
 Valian  Year  2500   Wholly  new   is  the   matter  of   the  pencilled 
 addition  given  in  note  14.  My  father  was  here  working  out  the 
 chronology  at large,  for there  is no  reason for  this story  to ap- 
 pear  in  Annals  of  Valinor.*  It  agrees  with  what  is  told   in  The 
 Silmarillion  (p.  54),  save  that  Denethor's  father is  there Lenwe 
 not  Dan,  and  that   these  Elves   came  from   the  third   host,  the 
 Teleri, not from the Noldor.                                                  
    This  is  the  first  indication  of  the  origin  of  the Green-elves, 
 who  have  hitherto  only  appeared  in  association  with  Beren (see 
 p  74,   and  Q   $14),  and   the  first   appearance  of   their  Elvish 
 names   Laiqi  or   Laiqeldar  (later   Laiquendi).  For   earlier  forms 
 of  Ossiriand  see  p.  287;  the  final  form  occurs  also  in  emenda- 
 tions  to  Q  ($$9,  10,  14).  Eredlindon  appears  in  a  late  addition 
 to Q 59, note 3.                                                                 


197 

                                                                              
 Valian Year 2900 (later 2700) In S and Q it is Tulkas and      
 Ulmo who are opposed to the release of Morgoth, as in The      
 Silmarillion (p. 66); in AV it is Tulkas and Aule. In AV ap-      
                                                                              
 (* It remained in the 'tradition' of these Annals, however, and is still present in 
 the much later Annals of A man (though there with a direction  to transfer  it to 
 the Annals of Beleriand).)                                                        

 

  pears the intercession of Nienna on  Morgoth's behalf,  and this 
  was retained in The Silmarillion  (p. 65),  though Nienna  is no 
  longer his sister.                                               
                                                                  
  Valian  Year  2950  'The  Dispossessed',  the  name given  to the 
  House  of  Feanor,  has  appeared  in   the  Old   English  name 
  Yrfeloran, p. 260.                                               
    I have noticed in my  commentary on  Q $4  that the  later in- 
  terpolation (note 6), telling that a messenger  came to  the Gods 
  in  council  with  tidings  that  Morgoth  was  in the  North of 
  Valinor and journeying to the house of Finwe,  is the  first hint 
  of  the  story  of Morgoth's  going to  Formenos and  his speech 
  with Feanor before the doors. In AV also, as originally written, 
  the  northward  movement  of  Morgoth  was  absent  (he  fled at 
  once into Arvalin after the council  of the  Gods in  which they 
  deposed  Feanor  and  sent  to  apprehend  Morgoth); but  in the 
  pencilled  interpolation  given  in note  16 Morgoth  'hid himself 
  in  the  North  of  the  land, as  was known  only to  Finwe and 
  Feanor, who dwelt now  apart'. It  was then  that the  Gods sent 
  to apprehend him,  though no  explanation is  given of  how they 
  knew  where  he  was;  but  the  story now  becomes structurally 
  the same as that in The Silmarillion (p. 72), where it  was only 
  when  Finwe  sent  messengers  to   Valmar  saying   that  Morgoth 
  had  come  to  Formenos  that  Orome and  Tulkas went  after him. 
                                                                  
  Valian Years 2990 - I The addition given in note 17, 'This       
  ward got Finwe for his friendship', refers, I think, to the rela- 
  tions between Morgoth and the Noldoli before his exposure.       
  This seems much more likely than that Morgoth actually suc-      
  ceeded in cozening the Noldoli in exile in the North of Valinor, 
  that they formed an alliance with him.                           
    It is remarkable that according to the revised dating no less 
  than 48 Valian Years (2950-2998), that is 480 Years of the       
  Sun, elapsed between Morgoth's flight into Arvalin and the de- 
  struction of the Trees.                                          
    The insertion (in two instalments) given in note 18 intro-     
  duces further new history of the 'Dark Ages' of Middle-eearth.  
  The Havens on the coast of Beleriand were marked in later on     
  the Westward Extension of the first map (see insert), where      

 

                                    
                                                                
 they are named  Brithombar and  Eldorest (see  p. 281).  Now ap- 
 pears also the withdrawal of  the Elves  of Beleriand  behind the 
 Girdle  of  Melian:  cf.  The  Silmarillion, pp.  96-7: [Thingol] 
 withdrew all  his people  that his  summons could  reach within 
 the fastness of Neldoreth  and Region.'  The name  Menegroth of 
 the    Thousand    Caves     has    not     occurred    before. 
 The incomplete pencilled addition is the first hint of the bat- 
 tle of the  Elves of  Beleriand with  the Orcs  after Morgoth's 
 return  ('the  first  battle  in  the  Wars of  Beleriand', The 
 Silmarillion p. 96), in which Denethor was slain,               
                                                                
 Valian Year 2992 (later 2999) In the account  of the  Flight of 
 the Noldoli there is a suggestion, in the  words 'The  march be- 
 gan, though the  Gods forbade  (and yet  hindered not)',  of the 
 speech of  the messenger  of Manwe  as the  march began  in The 
 Silmarillion (p. 85): 'Go not forth! ... No aid will  the Valar 
 lend you in this quest, but neither will they hinder you.'      
                                                                


198 

 Valian Year 2993 (later  Sun Year  29992) More  is now  told of 
 the content of the Prophecy of Mandos, in particular as it con- 
 cerns the altered fate of the Noldoli who  would not  turn back 
 from their rebellion. In Q ($5) nothing is said of this, and the 
 curse, as reported, is restricted to the  doom of  treachery and 
 the fear of treachery among themselves; but in a  later passage 
 ($7), which goes back to S and  indeed to  the Lost  Tales (see 
 p. 60), it is told that                                         
                                                                
   Immortal  were  the  Elves,  and...  no sickness  or pestilence 
   brought  them  death.  But they  could be  slain by  weapons in 
   those  days...  and  some  waned  and  wasted with  sorrow till 
   they faded from the earth.                                    
                                                                
 In AV the Doom of Mandos foretells that                         
                                                                
   a  measure  of  mortality  should  visit  them  [the  House  of 
   Feanor  and  those  who  followed  them],  that they  should be 
   lightly  slain  with weapons,  or torments,  or sorrow,  and in 
   the end fade and wane before the younger race.                

 

 At first sight this seems at odds with the story as it stands,       
 where  Finwe  and  many  other  Elves  had  already  been  slain by 
 Morgoth,  who  thus  'began  slaughter in  the world',.  'a measure 
 of mortality' was their fate in any case. But it  may be  that the 
 word 'lightly' is to  be given  full weight,  and that  the meaning 
 is that the Noldoli will be less  resistant to  death that  comes in 
 these  ways. In  The Silmarillion  (p. 88)  Mandos or  his emissary 
 said:                                                               
                                                                    
   For  though  Eru  appointed  you  to die  not in  Ea, and  no sick- 
   ness  may assail  you, yet  slain ye  may be,  and slain  ye shall 
   be: by weapon and by torment and by grief.                        
                                                                    
 This I take  to mean,  in effect:  Do not  forget that,  though you 
 are  immortal  in  that you  cannot die  through sickness,  you can 
 nonetheless  be  slain  in  other  ways;  and  you will  indeed now 
 die in such ways abundantly.'                                       
   The  waning  of  the  Elves  now  becomes   an  element   in  the 
 Doom of Mandos; on this see p. 206.                                 
   The  statement  in  AV  that  when  Finrod  and  many  others re- 
 turned  to  Valinor  and  were  pardoned  by  the Gods  'Aule their 
 ancient friend smiled  on them  no more'  is interesting.  It does 
 not appear in The Silmarillion. where nothing is said of  the re- 
 ception of Finarfin. (Finrod) and those who came with him on 
 their  return beyond  the fact  that 'they  received the  pardon of 
 the  Valar,  and  Finarfin  was  set  to  rule  the remnant  of the 
 Noldor in the Blessed Realm' (p. 88); but  it is  to be  related to 
 a  passage  in  the  old  Tale  of  the  Sun and  Moon (I.  176) in 
 which  Aule's  peculiar  anger  against the  Noldoli for  their in- 
 gratitude and for the Kinslaying is described.                      
   The  alliances  and  friendships  between  the  princes   of  the 
 Noldoli  in  the third  generation have  been touched  on in  S and 
 Q $5,  where  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of  Finrod, 
 sided  with  the  Feanorians  in  the  debate  in Tun  before the 
 Flight of  the Noldoli; in AV this  becomes a  friendship especial- 
 ly with Celegorm  and Curufin,  and is  no doubt  to be  related to 
 the evolution of the Nargothrond legend.                            
                                                                    
 Valian Year 2994 (later Sun Year 29994) The friendship of          
 Celegorm. and Curufin with Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor just          

 

        
                                                                  
 referred to leads to the remarkable  development (in  the addi- 
 tion given in note 21) that these  three sons  of Finrod  were ac- 
 tually allowed passage  in the  ships by  the Feanorians,  and that 
 only Felagund   came   over   the   Helkarakse   with   Fingolfin 
 (note 23). This  story if  adhered to  would presumably  have af- 


199 

 fected the  further  evolution  of  the history  of the  Noldor in 
 Beleriand. In The Silmarillion the  only especial  relationship of 
 friendship  between any  of the  sons of  Feanor and  their cousins 
 from  that  with  Aredhel  Fingolfin's  daughter)  is   that  be- 
 tween   Maedhros   and   Fingon;   and   Maedhros,   not  perceiving 
 that his father meant to burn the ships,  proposed that  Fingon be 
 among the first of the other Noldor to be brought  over in  a sec- 
 ond journey (p. 90).                                             
                                                                  
 Valian  Year  2995  (later  Sun  Year  29995)  Here the  firth of 
 Drengist is named for the first time in the narrative texts (it oc- 
 curs in the list of Old English names,  p. 257,  but is  not named 
 on  the  Westward  Extension  of  the  first map);  Eredlomin has 
 the later sense  of the  Echoing Mountains  (see pp.  233-4, 272); 
 and  Mithrim  is  used not  only of  the Lake  but of  the region 
 about  the  Lake,  and  the  Mountains  of Mithrim  are mentioned 
 for the first time (see  p. 272,  entry Hithlum).  The encampment 
 of  the  Feanorians  by  Lake  Mithrim  now  precedes  the Battle 
 under Stars.                                                      
                                                                  
 Valian Year 2996 (date later struck out) The first battle of the 
 returning Noldor with the Orcs is now fought in Mithrim, not 
 on the Northern plain (Q $8), and the plain at last receives an 
 Elvish name, Bladorion, referring to the time when it was still 
 grassland   (with  Bladorion   perhaps  compare   Bladonven  'the 
 wide earth',  a name  of Yavanna  given in  the old  Gnomish dic- 
 tionary,  I.  264,  entry  Palurien). The  Orcs are  pursued into 
 Bladorion  and  Feanor  is  wounded there,  but dies  in Mithrim, 
 The name Battle under Stars is added in Q $8,  note 2,  but this 
 is the  first  occurrence  of  an  Elvish  name, Dagor-os-Giliath 
 (later Dagor-nuin-Giliath).  Fredwethion replaces,  in the  text as 
 written,  Eredlomin  as  the  Elvish  name  of the  Shadowy Moun- 
 tains (previously  it  is  found  only in  later alterations,  Q II$15, 
 note 1, and on the first map; see p. 272).                         

 

 Valian Year 2997 (later Sun Year 29996) A new element in            
 AV  is  the  condition which  Morgoth proposed  for the  release of 
 Maidros.                                                            
                                                                    
 Valian  Year  3000  Here  is  introduced  the  story  that Fingolfin 
 after  landing  in  Middle-earth  marched   even  to   Angband  and 
 beat on the gates, but  (in the  emendation given  in note  28) be- 
 ing  prudent  retreated  to  Mithrim;  and  although  in  S and  Q Q 
 it  is  already  told that  the two  hosts of  the Noldor  were en. 
 camped  on  opposing  shores  of  Lake  Mithrim,  it  is  now  added 
 that   the   Feanorians   removed  to   the  southern   shore  when 
 Fingolfin came.                                                     
   On  the  phrase  'after came  measured time  into the  World' see 
 Q $6 note 6, and pp. 205-6,                                         
   With 'the Pennas or Qenta'  cf. the  title of  Q (p.  94): Quenta 
 Noldorinwa or Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh.                                  
                                                                    
                              APPENDIX.                              
                                                                    
           Old English versions of the Annals of Valinor,            
                     made by AElfwine or Eriol.                      
                                                                    
 The first version given here is certainly the oldest, and is per- 
 haps  earlier  than  the  Modern  English  Annals.  A few  late pen 
 cilled alterations or suggestions are given in the notes.           
                                   I.                               
       peos   gesegen   wearp  aerest   on   bocum   gesett   of 
       Pengolode   pam   Upwitan   of   Gondoline aer   pam  pe 
       heo  abrocen  wurde,  7  sippan aet  Sirigeones  Hype,  7 
       aet  Tafrobele  on  Toleressean  (paet is  Anetige), after 
       pam  pe  he  eft  west  com;  7  heo  wearp   paer geraedd 
       and   gepiedd   of   AElfwine,   pam   pe   ielfe   Eriol 
       genemdon.                                                     
                                                                    


200 

 Frumsceaft  Her aerest worhte  Ilufatar, paet  is Ealfaeder 
       oppe Heofonfaeder oppe Beorhtfaeder, eal ping.                  

 

    
                                                            
D.  geara para Falar (paet is para Mihta oppe Goda): an     10 
 gear para Goda bid swa lang swa tien gear beod nu         
 on paere worolde arimed aefter paere sunnan gange.            
 Melco (paet is Orgel) oppe Morgop (paet is               
 Sweart-os) oferwearp para Goda Blacern, 7 pa                
 Godu west gecirdon hie, and hie paer Valinor paet is    15       
 Godepel geworhton.                                          
                                                            
M.  Her pa Godu awehton pa Twegen Beamas, Laurelin              
 (paet is Goldleop) 7 Silpion (paet is Glisglom)             
                                                            
MM.  Godedles Middaeg oppe Heahprymm. Her bleowon                 
 pa Beamas pusend geara; ond Varda (heo waes             20               
 gydena aepelust) steorran geworhte; for pam hatte            
 heo Tinwetari Steorrena Hlaefdige. Her onwocon               
 Ielfe on Eastlandum; 7 se Melco weard gefangen 7            
 on clustre gebunden; 7 siddan comon ielfa sume on           
 Godedel.                                                25 
                                                            
MM op MMC.  Her  weard   Tun,  seo   hwite  burg,       
 atimbred  on  munte  Core.  Pa Telere  gewunodon giet       
 on  pam  weststrandum  para  Hiderlanda; ac  se Teler       
 pingol weard on wuda begalen.                            
                                                            
MMC op MMCC. Wunodon pa Telere on Anetige.               30            
                                                            
MMCC.  Her comon pa Telere op Godedel.                          
                                                            
MMD.  Her purh searucraeftas apohton and  beworhton pa       
 Nold-ielfe  gimmas   missenlice,  7   Feanor  Noldena       
 hlaford    worhte    pa   Silmarillas,    paet  waeron       
 Eorclanstanas.                                           35 
                                                            
MM op MMDCCCC.   Haeftnyd Morgodes.                             
                                                            
MMDCCCC.  Her weard Morgop alysed, 7 he wunode               
 on Godedle, 7 licette paet he hold waere Godum 7              
 Ielfum.                                                     

 

MMCCCCXCLX.  Her  ofsloh  Morgod  pa   Beamas  ond      40   
 opfleah, 7 aetferede mid him para Elfa gimmas  7 pa           
 Eorclanstanas. Sippan  forleton pa  Noldelfe hiera           
 hyldo, and  eodon on  elpeodignes, 7  gefuhton wid           
 pa Telere aet Elfethyde 7 sige namon 7 aetferedon pa           
 Teleriscan scipu.                                      45 
   Her weard micel gesweorc 7 genipu on Godedle               
 7 ofer ealne middangeard. Pa hwile endniwede                 
 Morgod his ealde faesten on pam Norpdaelum, and               
 getrymede micle, and orcas gegaderode, and pa                
 Eorclanstanas on his irenhelme befaeste.               50                   
   Pa for Feanor mid his seofon sunum and micelre             
 fierde norp 7 pa siglde on Teleriscum scipum to              
 pam Weststrandum, and paer forbaerndon hie pa                  
 scipu ond aswicon hiera geferan pe on last sidodon.          
   Her gefeaht Feanores fierd wip pam orcum 7 sige      55    
 namon 7 pa orcas gefliemdon op Angband (paet is               
 Irenhelle); ac Godmog, Morgodes pegn, ofsloh                 
 Feanor, and Maegdros geweold sippan Feanores                 
 folc. Pis gefeoht hatte Tungolgud.                          
                                                             
                                NOTES.                        
                                                             
                     Textual Notes to Version I.              
                                                             


201 

 All  the following  changes, except  that in  line 9,  were made 
 very quickly  in pencil  and without  striking out  the original 
 forms; they belong to  a much  later period,  as is  shown by the 
 fact that  Melkor for  Melko was  not introduced  until 1951. 
                                                             
    2.    Pengolode > Pengolode                               
    2.    Gondoline > Gondolinde                              
    4.    Tafrobele > (probably) Taprobele (see p. 344 note to 
          line 8, and p. 347 note to line 7).                 
    6.    Eriol > Ereol                                       
    10.   Falar is an emendation in ink of Valar.             
    13.   Melco > Melcor (but rot at line 23')                
    14.   Blacern > Leohtfatu                                 

 

  
                                                                              
  16.  Godepel > Esa-eard (esa genitive plural of os, see p.                   
       255).                                                                   
                                                                              
                       Old English Names in Version I.                         
                                                                              
 Far less   use  is   made  of   Old  English   equivalents  than   is  pro- 
 vided  for   in  the   lists  given   on  pp.   255  -   61;  so   we  have 
 Gondoline    with    an    Old    English    inflectional    ending    (not 
 Stangaldorburg,   etc.),   Nold(i)elfe,   also   genitive   plural  Noldena 
 (not    Deopelfe,    etc.),    Feanor,   Maegdros,    Godmog,    on   munte 
 Core.   Old   English   equivalents,   used   or   only    mentioned,   are 
 mostly   actual    translations.   Thus    Melco   is    Orgel   ('Pride'); 
 Morgod   is   Sweart-os   ('Black   God',   'Dark   God',  see   II.  67); 
 Laurelin   is   Goldleop   ('Gold-song',   'Song   of   Gold'   -   cf.  the 
 translation   'singing-gold'   in   the   name-list    to   The    Fall   of 
 gondolin,   II.   216,   and    contrast   Glengold    imitating   Glingol, 
 pp.  257  -  8);  Silpion  is  Glisglom  (of  which  the  elements  are ev- 
 idently  the  stem  glis-  seen  in  the  verbs  glisian,  glisnian 'shine, 
 glitter',   and   glom   'twilight');   Alqalonde   is   Elfethyd   ('Swan- 
 haven')*;  Tol  Eressea  is  Anetig  (  Solitary  Isle  ).,   the  Battle- 
 under-Stars   is   Tungolgud   ('Star-battle').   Irenhell    for   Angband 
 and  Godedel  ('Land  of  the  Gods')   for  Valinor   are  found   in  the 
 list of Old English names.                                                    
  The   Silmarils   are   Eorclanstanas   (also  treated   as  an   Old  En- 
 glish  noun  with   plural  Silmarillas).   There  are   several  different 
 forms   of   this   Old   English   word:  eorclan-,   eorcnan-,  earcnan-, 
 and   eorcan-   from   which   is   derived   the   'Arkenstone'   of   the 
 Lonely   Mountain.   The   first   element   may   be  related   to  Gothic 
 airkns  'holy'.  With  middangeard  line  47  cf.   my  father's   note  in 
 Guide   to  the   Names  in   The  Lord   of  the   Rings,  in   A  Tolkien 
 Compass,  p.  189:   'The  sense   is  "the   inhabited  lands   of  (Elves 
 and)   Men",   envisaged   as   lying   between   the   Western   Sea   and 
 that   of   the   Far   East   (only   known  in   the  West   by  rumour). 
 Middle-earth   is   a   modern    alteration   of    medieval   middel-erde 
 from Old English middan-geard.'                                               
  Varda's   name   Tinwetari,   Queen   of   the   Stars,   goes   back   to 
                                                                              
 (*This Old English name (with variant initial vowel, lelfethyp) is found long 
 before in a marginal note to Kopas Alqalunte in the tale of The Flight of the 
 Noldoli, I. 164, footnote.)                                                   

 

 the tale of The Chaining of Melko (I. 100), and is found also       
 in Q $2.                                                            
                                                                    
                         Dates in Version I.                         
                                                                    
   The   date   MMDCCCCXCIX   (written   with    M   for    MM,   as 
 also  the  two  occurrences  of  MMDCCCC,   but  these   are  obvi- 
 ously  mere  slips  without  significance),  2999,  does  not agree 
 with  that in  the Modern  English version  for the  destruction of 
 the  Two  Trees  and  the rape  of the  Silmarils, which  are there 
 given under 2990 - 1.                                               
                                                                    


202 

   This  text  relates  very  closely indeed  to the  Modern English 
 version.  There are  slight differences  of substance  between them 
 here  and  there,  and  some of  the emendations  made to  the mod- 
 ern  version are  embodied in  the Old  English text;  these points 
 are mentioned in  the notes,  as also  are some  details concerning 
 the dates and some features of the names.                           
   The  text  was  lightly  emended  in  pencil,  but  these changes 
 are  almost  without  exception  modifications  of   word-order  or 
 other slight syntactical changes, and all such I take into the text 
 silently. It breaks off abruptly at the beginning of the  annal en- 
 try  equivalent to  2991 with  the words  'Valinor lay  now', these 
 are not at the foot of a page, and none of the text has been lost. 
   At first sight it  is puzzling  that in  the preamble  the Annals 
 of  Valinor  are  called Pennas,  since the  Pennas or  Quenta (see 
 pp. 250 - 1) is clearly intended to represent a  different literary 
 tradition from the Annals,  or at  least a  different mode  of pre- 
 senting  the  material.  The  preamble  goes  on  to  say, however, 
 that this book Pennas is divided into three  parts: the  first part 
 is  Valinorelumien,  that  is Godedles  geargetael (i.e.  Annals of 
 Valinor);  the  second  is Beleriandes  geargetael (i.e.  Annals of 
 Beleriand);  and  the  third  is  Quenta  Noldorinwa or  Pennas nan 
 Goelid,  that  is  Noldelfaracu  (the   History  of   the  Noldorin 
 Elves). Thus, here at  any rate,  Pennas (Quenta)  is used  in both 
 a  stricter  and  a  wider  sense:  the  whole  opus  that AElfwine 
 translated in Tol Eressea  is the  Pennas (Quenta),  'the History', 

 

 but the term is also used more narrowly of the Pennas nan 
 Goelid or Quenta Noldorinwa, which may be thought of as 
 'the Silmarillion proper', as opposed to the 'Annals'. In fact, in 
 an addition to the very brief Old English version III of the An- 
 nals of Valinor (p. 347, note to line 5) it is expressly said: 
 This third part is also called Silmarillion, that is the history of 
 the Eorclanstanas [Silmarils].' 
                                                                     
        Her onginned seo boc pe man Pennas nemned, 7                 
        heo is on preo gedaeled; se forma dael is                       
        Valinorelumien paet is Godedles geargetael, 7 se               
        oper is Beleriandes geargetael, 7 se pridda                   
        Quenta Noldorinwa oppe Pennas nan Goelid paet         5                 
        is Noldelfaracu. Pas aerest awrat Pengolod se                  
        Upwita of Gondoline, aer pam pe heo abrocen                       
        wurde, 7 sippan aet Siriones hype 7 aet Tavrobele                
        in Toleressean (paet is Anetege), pa he eft west              
        com. And pas bec AElfwine of Angelcynne              10                    
        geseah on Anetege, pa pa he aet sumum cerre                    
        funde hie; 7 he geleornode hie swa he betst                   
        mihte 7 eft gepeodde 7 on Englisc asette.                      
                                                                     
                      Her onginned Godedles geargetael.                
                                                                     
        On frumsceafte Iluuvatar, paet is Ealfaeder, gescop             
        eal ping, 7 pa Valar, paet is pa Mihtigan (pe sume   15          
        menn sippan for godu heoldon) comon on pas                    
        worolde. Hie sindon nigon: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule,                 
        Orome, Tulkas, Mandos, Lorien, Melko. Para                    
        waeron Manwe 7 Melko his bropor ealra mihtigoste,              
        ac Manwe waes se yldra, 7 waes Vala-hlaford 7        20                
        halig, 7 Melko beah to firenlustum and                        
        upahaefennesse and ofermettum and wearp yfel and              
        unmaedlic, and his nama is awergod and                         
        unasprecenlic, ac man nemned hine Morgod in                  
        Noldelfisc-gereorde. Pa Valacwene hatton swa:        25              
        Varda 7 Geauanna, pe gesweostor waeron, Manwes                 

 

 cwen  7  Aules  cwen;  7  Vana  Oromes cwen;  7 Nessa       
 Tulkases   cwen   (seo   waes  Oromes   sweostor);  7       
 Uinen,  merecwen,  Osses   wif;  7   Vaire  Mandosses       
 cwen,  7  Este  Loriendes  cwen.  Ac  Ulmo   7  Melko   30 
 naefdon cwene, 7 Nienna seo geomore naefde wer.               


203 

    Mid   pissum  geferum   comon  micel   heap laesra       
 gesceafta,  Valabearn,  oppe  gaestas   Valacynnes  pe       
 laesse maegen haefdon. Pas waeron Valarindi.                    
                                                            
    And pa Valar aer pam pe Mona 7 Sunne wurden           35 
 gerimdon tide be langfirstum oppe ymbrynum, pe                
 waeron hund Valageara on geteald; 7 an Valagear              
 waes efne swa lang swa ten gear sindon nu on                 
 worolde.                                                    
                                                            
D.     On  pam  Valageare  D  mid searucraefte fordyde   40 
 Morgop  pa  blacern,  pe  Aule  smipode,  paette  seo       
 weorold   mid   sceolde   onleohted  weordan;   7  pa       
 Valar,  buton  Morgope   anum,  gecerdon   hie  West,       
 and  paer  getimbredon  Valinor  (paet is  Godedel) be       
 saem  tweonum  (paet  is  betwuh  Utgarsecge  pe  calle   45 
 eordan  bebuged,  and  seo   micle  Westsae, paet is       
 Garsecg,    oppe    Ingarsecg,   oppe    Belegar   on       
 Noldelfisce;   7   on   Westsaes  strandum  geheapodon       
 hie  micle  beorgas. And  middangear[d]es rihtgesceap       
 wearp  on  pam  dagum aerest  of  Morgode  onhwerfed.     50 
                                                            
M. Her, aefter  pam  pe  Valinor  weard  getimbrod, 7       
 Valmar  paet  is  Godaburg,  gescopon  7  onwehton  pa       
 Valar  pa  Twegen  Beamas,  operne  of  seolfre operne       
 of golde geworhtne, pe  hira leoma  onleohte Valinor.       
 Ac   Morgop bude   on  middangearde   and  geworhte       55 
 him  paer micel  faesten on  norpdaelum; and  on paere       
 tide  forbraec  he  and  forsceop  he  micle  eordan 7       
 land.  Sippan  wearp  pusend  geara blaed 7  bliss on       
 Godeple,  ac  on  middangearde  pa waestmas,   pe  be       
 para     blacerna     ontendnesse    aer     ongunnon     60  
 upaspringan,    amerde   wurdon.    To   middangearde       
 com  para  Vala  nan  butan  Orome,  pe   oft  wolde       

 

          
                                                         
 huntian on paere firnan eordan be deorcum                 
 wealdum, 7 Iauannan pe hwilum for pider.                 
                                                         
MM. Pis  gear  bip  Valarices  Middaeg  oppe  Heah-    65 
 prymm  geteald,  7  pa  waes Goda  myrgpu gefullod.       
 Pa geworhte Varda steorran 7 sette hie on lyfte (7       
 py hatte  heo Tinwetari,  paet is  Tungolcwen), and       
 sona aeher  pam  of  Godeple  wandrodon  Valarindi       
 sume 7 comon on  middangeard, and  para gefraegost    70 
 weard Melian, pe waes aer Loriendes hiredes,  7 hire       
 stefn  waes maere mid Godum:  ac heo  ne com  eft to       
 Godabyrig aer pon pe fela geara ofereodon  and fela       
 wundra   gelumpon,   ac   nihtegalan  waeron  hire       
 geferan  7  sungon  ymb hie  be pam  deorcum wudum    75 
 on westchlum.       
 Pa  pa  paet tungol,  pe  gefyrn   Godasicol  oppe       
 Brynebrer hatte, lixte aerest forp on heofonum, for       
 pam pe Varda hit asette Morgope  on andan  him his       
 hryre   to   bodianne,   pa   onwocon   pa  yldran    80 
 Ealfaederes  bearn on  middan  worolde: paet sindon       
 Elfe. Hie  funde Orome  and wearp  him freondhald,       
 and para  se maesta dael sippan  West foron  him on       
 laste and mid  his latteowdome  sohton Beleriandes       
 weststrand,  for  pam  pe  Godu  hie   lapodon  on    85 
 Valinor.                                                 
  Pa   wearp   Morgop  aer  mid   micle  heregange       
 forhergod  and  gebunden  and  sippan aet Mandosse       
 on cwearterne gedon. Paer weard he witefaest seofon       
 firstmearce (paet is seofon hund Valageara)  op paet  90 
 he daedbette  and him  forgifennesse baede.  On pam       
 gefeohtum  eac  wurdon  eordan land  eft forbrocen       
 swide 7 forscapen.                                      


204 

                                                         
 Pa   Cwendi   (paet  waeron Leohtelfe)   and   pa       
 Noldelfe sohton aerest to lande  on Valinor,  7 on    95 
 pam  grenan   hylle   Core   pam  saeriman   neah       
 getimbrodon  hie  Tun pa  hwitan Elfaburg;  ac pa       
 Teleri,  pe  sip comon  on Beleriand,  gebidon ane       

 

 firstmearce paer be strande, and sume hie ne foron 
 panon sippan naefre. Para waes Pingol gefraegost,      100 
 Elwes brodor, Teleria hlafordes: hine Melian begol. 
 Hie haefde he sippan to wife, and cyning weard on 
 Beleriande; ac paet gelamp aefter pam pe Ulmo          
 oflaedde Teleria pone maestan dael on Anetige, and      
 brohte hie swa to Valinor. pas ping wurdon on pam      105 
 Valagearum MM op MMC.                                
                                                     
   Of   MMC   op   MMCC   wunodon   pa   Teleri   on 
 Toleressean   onmiddum   Ingarsecge,    panon   hie 
 mihton  Valinor  feorran  ofseon;  on   MMCC  comon 
 hie  mid  micelre  scipferde  to Valinore,  and paer   110 
 gewunodon   on   eastaerman   Valinores,   and 
 geworhton  paer  burg  and  hype,  and   nemdon  hie 
 Alqualonde, paet is  Elfethyp, for paem pe hie paer 
 hira scipu befaeston, 7 pa waeron ielfetum gelic.      
                                                     
  Paes  ymb  preo  hund  sumera,  oppe ma oppe laes,    115 
 apohton  pa  Noldelfe   gimmas  and   ongunnon  hie 
 asmipian,  and  sippan   Feanor  se   smip,  Finwes 
 yldesta  sunu  Nol[d]elfa  hlafordes,   apohte  and 
 geworhte   pa   felamaeran Silmarillas,   pe  peos 
 gesaegen fela ah  to secganne  be hira  wyrdum. Hie    120 
 lixton  mid  hira  agenum  leohte,  for pam  pe hie 
 waeron   gefylde  para   twegra  Beama   leomum,  pe 
 wurdon  paeroninnan  geblanden  and  to  halgum  and 
 wundorfyllum fyre gescapen.                          
                                                     
MMDCC. Her Morgop daedbette and  him forgefennesse       125 
 baed; ond  be  Niennan  pingunga  his  sweostor him 
 Manwe  his  brodor  are  geteah,  Tulkases  unpance 
 and Aules, and hine  gelesde; 7  he licette paet he 
 hreowsode   7   eadmod   waere,   and    pam  Valum 
 gehersum  and  pam  elfum swipe  hold; ac  he leah,     130 
 and swipost he bepaehte pa Noldelfe,  for pam  pe he 
 cupe fela uncupra pinga laeran; he  gitsode swapeah 
 hira gimma and hine langode pa Silmarillas.         

 

                           
                                                        
MMCM. Purh twa firstmearce wunode pa giet Valinor         
 on blisse, ac tweo 7 inca aweox swapeah manigum          135 
 on heortan swulce nihtsceadu nathwylc, for pam pe       
 Morgop for mid dernum runungum and searolicum          
 lygum, and yfelsop is to secganne, swipost he           
 onbryrde pa Noldelfe and unsibbe awehte betwux          
 Finwes sunum, Feanor and Fingolfin and Finrod,           140      
 and ungepwaernes betwux Godum 7 elfum.                   
                                                        
MMCMD. Be Goda dome wearp Feanor, Finwes yldesta         
 sunu, mid his hirede 7 folgope adon of Noldelfa         
 ealdordome - py hatte sippan Feanores cynn pa           
 Erfeloran, for pam dome 7 for py pe Morgoth              145         
 bereafode hie hira mapma - 7 pa Godu ofsendon           
 Morgop to demanne hine; ac he aetfleah 7 darode         
 on Arualine and bepohte hine yfel.                      
                                                        
MMCMD - Her Morgop fullfremede his searowrencas        
MMCMDI sohte Ungoliante on Arualine and baed hie          150 
 fultumes. Pa bestaelon hie eft on Valinor 7 pa           
 Beamas forspildon, and sippan aetburston under           


205 

 pam weaxendum sceadum and foron norp and paer            
 hergodon Feanores eardunge and aetbaeron gimma            
 unrim and pa Silmarillas mid ealle, 7 Morgop             155       
 ofsloh paer Finwe 7 manige his elfe mid him and          
 awidlode swa Valinor aerest mid blodgyte and             
 morpor astealde on worolde. He pa fleame generede       
 his feorh, peah pe pa Godu his ehton wide landes,       
 sippan becom he on middangeardes norpdaelas and          160       
 geedstadelode paer his faesten, and fedde and            
 samnode on niwe his yfele peowas, ge Balrogas ge        
 orcas. Pa com micel ege on Beleriand, 7 Pingol his      
 burgfaesten getrymede on Menegrop paet is pusend          
 peostru, and Melian seo cwen mid Vala-gealdrum           165        
 begol paet land Doriap and bewand hit ymbutan,           
 and sippan sohton se maesta dael para deorc-elfa of       
 Beleriande Pingoles munde.                              
                                                        
 MMCMI. Her laeg Valinor on                               

 

               NOTES TO VERSlON II.                               
                                                                
   6.    Noldelfaracu emended in ink from Noldelfagesaegen.       
   8.    Tavrobele > (probably) Tafrobele, in pencil. In version 
         I Tapobele probably > Taprobele, and in version III     
         Taprobele as written, but in this case the emendation 
         seems clearly to be to f; this would be a mere          
         spelling-correction (f being the Old English spelling 
         for the voiced consonant [v] in this position).         
 15-16.  This phrase (pe sume menn sippan for godu heoldon)      
         is not in the Modern English version, but cf. the open- 
         ing section of Q (p. 94): 'These spirits the Elves      
         named the Valar, which is the Powers, though Men        
         have often called them Gods.'                           
  17.    Osse has been inadvertently omitted.                    
  20.    It is not said in the Modern English version that       
         Manwe was the elder.                                    
  26     Geauanna: this spelling would represent 'Yavanna' in 
         Old English. At line 64 the name is spelt Iauanna(n), 
         and in the Old English version of the Quenta (p. 253) 
         Yavanna; in version III Geafanna (p. 347).              
 29-31   The text here embodies the sense of the pencilled       
         emendation to the Modern English version (p. 320        
         note 2) whereby Vaire enters as the spouse of Mandos 
         and Nienna becomes solitary. At line 31, after naefde 
         wer, was added in pencil: Seo waes Manwes sweostor       
         7 Morgodes; this is stated in the Modern English ver- 
         sion as written.                                        
 45-7.   Utgarsecg, Garsecg, Ingarsecg: see pp. 255,             
         256.- Belegar: see p. 256; see also insert.             
  49.    middangeardes: see p. 337.                              
  52.    Valmar is Godaburg in the list of Old English names, 
         p. 259.                                                 
 65-7.   The changes made to the text of the Modern English      
         version, in order to date the Starmaking and the Awak- 
         ening of the Elves before 2000 (see pp. 320-1, notes 6 
         and 10) are not embodied in the Old English.            
 71.     The statement that Melian was of Lorien's people is     
         not in the Modern English version, but is found in S 
         and Q ($2) and goes back to the Tale of Tiniviel        

 

             
                                                                   
          (II.  8):  '[Wendelin]  was  a  sprite  that  escaped from 
          Lorien's gardens before even Kor was built.'              
    78.   Brynebrer  ('Burning  Briar'):  this  name  for  the Great 
          Bear,  not  found  in the  Modern English  version, occurs 
          in    Q    ($2)    and   in    the   Lay    of   Leithian. 
 89 - 90. seofon firstmearce, not  'nine ages'  as first  written in 
          the   Modern   English   version   (p.   321    note   9). 


206 

          firstmearce  ('spaces  of  time')  is  an  emendation made 
          at  the  time  of  writing  from  langfirstas (one  of the 
          words used for Valian 'ages' earlier, line 36).           
    94.   Cwendi  emended  in  pencil  first  to  Eldar and  then to 
          Lindar;  Quendi  >  Lindar  also  in  Q  ($2   and  subse- 
          quently)  and  in  the modern  version.- Leohtelfe  is not 
          one  of  the  Old  English  names  of  the  First  Kindred 
          given  in  the  list on  pp. 255ff.,  but they  are called 
          Light-elves in S and Q ($2; see p. 51).                   
   104.   Anetige spelt thus, as in version I line 4;  Anetege lines 
          9 and 11.                                                 
   108.   Ingarsecge < Garsecge (see lines 45-7).                   
   125.   For the date 2700 see  note to  lines 89  - 90  above, and 
          the note on dates, p. 322.                                
   145.   Erfeloran  ('the  Dispossessed'),  with   variant  initial 
          vowel  Yrfeloran,  is  found  in the  list of  Old English 
          names of the Feanorians, p. 260.                          
   149.   These   dates   are  presumably   to  be   interpreted  as 
          2950  -  1:  in  the  previous  entry  (line   133)  MMCMD 
          corresponds  to  2950  in  the  Modern   English  version. 
          My  father  was  here  using   D  =   50,  not   500.  But 
          2950  -  1  does  not  correspond  to  the  Modern English 
          version,  which  has  2990-1.  The  discrepancy   is  per- 
          haps  no  more  than  a  mere  error  of  writing  (though 
          version I is also discrepant in  this date,  having 2999); 
          the  date  of  the  next  entry,  MMCMI  (2901),  is obvi- 
          ously an error, from  its place  in the  chronological se- 
          ries.                                                     
 163-8.   This  sentence  represents  part of  the passage  added to 
          the  Modern  English  version  (p.   321  note   18),  but 
          omits  the  reference  to  the   Elves  who   remained  in 
          Brithombar and Eglorest.                                  

 

                                  III.                              
                                                                   
    This version,  on a  single manuscript  page, gives  a slightly 
  different form of the first twenty-odd lines of version II. It is 
  much  later than  II, as  is shown  by Melkor,  not Melko  (see p 
  282), but was  nonetheless taken  directly from  it, as  is shown 
  by  the  continued  absence  of Osse  from the  list of the Valar 
  (see note to line 17 in version II).  Later changes  pencilled on 
  version  I  are  here   embodied  in   the  text   (Pengolod  for 
  Pengolod, Taprobele for Tafrobele, Melkor for Melko).             
    Version III is cast in a different form of Old English, that of 
  ninth century  Mercia (some  of the  forms are  peculiarly charac 
  teristic of the  Mercian dialect  represented by  the interlinear 
  glosses on the  Vespasian Psalter).  A few  pencilled emendations 
  are not included in the text, but recorded in the notes that fol- 
  low.                                                              
                                                                   
  Her onginned seo boc pe man Pennas nemned on aelfisc,              
  7 hio is on preo gedaeled: se forma dael is Ualinorelumien          
  paet is Godoedles gergetael; 7 se oder dael is Beleriandes           
  gergetael; 7 se pridda Quenta Noldorinwa odde Pennas na             
  Ngoeloed, paet is Noldaelfaracu. pas boc aerest awrat           5              
  Pengolod se udwita on Gondoline aer pam pe heo abrocen             
  wurde 7 seoddan aet Siriones hyde 7 aet Taprobele on Tol-           
  eressean (paet is Anetege), pa he eft west com. And pas            
  bec AElfwine of Ongulcynne gesaeh on Anetege ha da he              
  aet sumum cerre paet land funde; 7 he daer liornode hie        10          
  swa he betst maehte 7 eft gepeodde 7 on englisc gereord            
  asette.                                                           
                                                                   
  Her onginned Godoedles gergetael, 7 spriced aerest of               
  weorulde gescefte. On frumscefte gescop Iluuatar paet is           
  Allfeder all ping, 7 pa pa seo weoruld aerest weordan          15           
  ongon pa comun hider on eordan pa Ualar (paet is pa                
  Mehtigan pe sume men seoddan for godu heoldun). Hi                
  earun nigun on rime: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome,                    


207 

  Tulcas, Mandos, Lorien, Melkor. Peara werun Manwe 7               
  Melcor his brodur alra mehtigoste, ac Manwe wes se             20             
  aeldra 7 is Uala-hlafard 7 halig, 7 Melcor beh to                  
  firenlustum 7 to upahefennisse 7 ofermoettum 7 weard              

 

 yfel 7 unmedlic, 7 his noma is awergod 7 unasproecenlic, 
 for pam man nemned hine Morgop on                         
 Noldaelfiscgereorde. Orome 7 Tulcas werun gingran on     25      
 Alfeadur gepohte acende aer pere weorulde gescepennisse      
                                                             
 ponne odre fife. Pa  Uala-cwene hattun  swe: Uarda        
 Manwes cwen, 7 Geafanna Aules cwen (pa pa he and hie       
 don to sinhiwan aefter  pam pe  Ualar hider  comon on        
 weorulde).                                             30 
                                                             
                 NOTES 10 VERSION III.                        
                                                             
 2-4. Ualinorelumien pat is and Quenta Noldorinwa odde 
                are circled in pencil as if for exclusion. 
 5. Added in pencil here: 'and pes pridda dael man eac 
     nemned Silmarillion paet is Eorclanstana gewyrd.' See 
                                                   p. 339. 
 5-6. on Gondoline is an emendation in ink from of 
   Gondoline, i.e. Pengolod began the work in Gondolin; 
   but this is implied in the preambles to versions I and II, 
   which have of Gondoline here. - Gondoline 
   Gondolinde in pencil, as in version I (note to line 2). 
 7. Taprobele is very clearly written with p; see p. 344 
    note to line 8. 
 18. Osse is left out following version II. 
 19. Melkor > Melcor in ink at the second occurrence, no 
  doubt at the time of writing, since Melcor is written at 
  line 20. 
 25-7. The statement that Orome and Tulkas 'were younger in 
  the thought of Iluvatar' is absent from the other ver- 
  sions (cf. The Silmarillion p. 26: 'Manwe and Melkor 
  were brethren in the thought of Iluvatar').- odre fife: 
  i.e. the other Valar with the exclusion of Manwe and 
  Melkor. See p. 349, Old English text lines 1 - 4. 
 28. Geafanna: see p. 344, note to line 26. 
 28-30. It is very notable that Aule and Yavanna are here 
      (alone) said to have become husband and wife (wurdon 
  to sinhiwan) after the Valar came into the world. In The 
  Silmarillion the only union among the Valar that is said 
  to have taken place after the entry into Arda is that of 

 

  Tulkas and Nessa; and Tulkas came late to Arda (pp.               
  35-6). See further p. 349.                                       
                                                                  
                                IV.                                 
                                                                  
 This is  not a  version, but  a single  page of  manuscript with, 
 first, a different beginning to the Annals of Valinor in Modern 
 English, and then  ten lines,  written very  rapidly, in  Old En- 
 glish. Both contain interesting features. The first reads as fol- 
 lows:                                                             
                                                                  
                         Annals of Valinor.                         
                                                                  
 These  were  written  first  by  Rumil  the  Elfsage  of Valinor, 
 and  after   by  Pengolod   the  Wise   of  Gondolin,   who  made 
 also  the  Annals  of  Beleriand,  and  the  Pennas that  are set 
 forth  below.  These  also  did  AElfwine  of the  Angelcynn turn 
 into speech of his land.                                          
                                                                  
 Here beginneth the Annals of Valinor and the founda-              
 tions of the world.                                               
                                                                  
 Of the Valar and their kindred                                    


208 

                                                                  
        At the beginning Iluvatar, that is Allfather, made all     
 things, and the Valar, or Powers, came into  the world.           
 These are nine: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome, Tulkas, Osse,           
 Lorien, Mandos, and Melko.                                        
                                                                  
 Pennas  is  here  used  in  the  narrow sense  of 'The  History of 
 the Gnomes' (Quenta Noldorinwa, Silmaril/ion): see p. 338.        
 Here Rumil appears  as author,  and in  view of  the interpolation 
 in  AV  (note  20)  'Here  endeth  that which  Rumil wrote'  it is 
 clear  that  the  words of  this preamble  'These were  written first 
 by  Rumil...  and  after  by  Pengolod'  mean  that  Pengolod  com- 
 pleted what Rumil began. The next version of the Annals of        
 Valinor in fact makes this  explicit, for  after 'Here  endeth that 
 which  Rumil wrote'  the later  text has  'Here followeth  the con- 
 tinuation of Pengolod', and the two interpolations in AV (notes 

 

  14 and 18) concerning events in Middle-earth before the Re- 
   turn of the Noldoli are embodied in the second version as ad- 
   ditions by Pengolod: 'This have I, Pengolod, added here, for it 
   was not known unto Rumil.' 
                                   
    In  the  original tale  of The  Music of  the Ainur  (I. 47  - 8)             
  Rumil  was  a Noldo  of Kor,*  but he  also spoke  to Eriol  of his             
  'thraldom  under   Melko'.  From   the  reference   here  to   Rumil  as             
  'the  Elfsage  of  Valinor',  however,  and  from  his  ignorance of             
  events in Middle-earth, it seems  clear that  in the  later concep-             
  tion he never left  Valinor. It  might be  suggested that  his part             
  in  the Annals  ends where  it does  (p. 317  and note  20) because             
  he was  one  of  those who  returned to  Valinor with  Finrod after             
  hearing  the  Doom  of  Mandos.  This  is admittedly  pure specula-             
  tion, but it is perhaps significant that in the next version of the             
  Annals  the  end  of  Rumil's  part  in  the work  was moved  on to             
  the end of  the entry  for the  Valian Year  2993, after  the words             
  'But Aule  their ancient  friend smiled  on them  no more,  and the             
  Teleri were estranged';  thus his  part ends  with the  actual rec-             
  ord of  Finrod's return,  and of  the reception  that he  and those             
  with him received.                                                              
                                                                                 
    The  passage  in Old  English that  follows begins  with vir-                 
  tually  the  same  phrase,  concerning  Orome  and  Tulkas,  as                 
  that in version III lines 23 - 5; but this manuscript has a cu-                 
  rious,  uninterpretable  sign  between  Orome  and  the  plural                 
  verb waeron,  which  in  view  of  the other  text I  expand to                 
  mean 7 Tulkas.                                                                  
                                                                                 
    Orome   [7   Tulkas]   waeron  gingran   on  Ealfaederes                       
  gepohtum  acende aer paere worolde  gescepennisse ponne                       
  opre fife, 7 Orome  weard Iafannan  geboren, seo  pe wyrd                       
  after nemned, ac he nis Aules sunu.                                             
    Mid  pissum  mihtigum  comon  manige laessan  gaestasp aes                       
  ilcan cynnes 7 cneorisse, peah laessan maegnes. Pas sindon                       
                                                                                 
  (* As he remained; cf. The Silmarillion p. 63: 'Then it was that the Noldor first 
  bethought  them  of  letters,  and  Rumil  of  Tirion  was  the  name   of  the 
  loremaster who  first achieved  fitting signs  for the  recording of  speech and 
  song.')                                                                       

 

 

 pa Vanimor, pa Faegran. Mid him eac pon wurdon getealde                         
 hira bearn, on worolde acende, pa waeron manige and swipe                         
 faegre. Swylc waes Fionwe Manwes sunu                                           
                                                                               
   There  follow   a  few   more  words   that  are   too  uncertain   to  re- 
 produce.   Here   Orome,   younger   in   the   thought   of   Iluvatar   than 
 the  other  great  Valar  'born  before   the  making   of  the   world',  is 
 declared   to  be   the  son   of  Yavanna   but  not   of  Aule,   and  this 
 must   be   connected   with   the   statement  in   the  Old   English  ver- 
 sion   III  that   Yavanna  and   Aule  became   sinhiwan  after   the  entry 


209 

 of the Valar into the world (see p. 347 - 8, note to lines 28 - 30).           
   In  what  is   said  here   concerning  the   lesser  spirits   of  Valarin 
 race   there   are   differences   from  AV   (p.  311)   and  the   Old  En- 
 glish  version  II  (p.  340).  In  this   present  fragment   these  spirits 
 are   not   called  Valarindi   but  Vanimor,   'the  Fair'.*   The  Children 
 of   the  Valar,   'who  were   many  and   very  beautiful',   are  counted 
 among   the   Vanimor,   but,   in   contradiction  to   AV,  they   were  on 
 worolde  acende,  'born  in  the  world'.   At  this   time,  it   seems,  my 
 father   was   tending   to   emphasize   the   generative   powers   of  the 
 great  Valar,  though  afterwards  all  trace   of  the   conception  disap- 
 peared.                                                                        
                                                                               
 (*The word Vanimor has not occurred before, but its  negative Vi:animor  is de- 
 fined in the tale of The Coming of the Valar (1. 75) as 'monsters, giants, and 
 ogres',  and  elsewhere in  the Lost  Tales Uvanimor  are creatures  bred by 
 Morgoth (I. 236 - 7), and even Dwarves (11. 136).)                            

 

 

 

                                VII.                                
                                                                   
                       THE EARLIEST ANNALS OF                       
                             BELERIAND.                             
                                                                   
 As with the  Annals of  Valinor, these  are the  'earliest' Annals 
 of Beleriand because they were  followed by  others, the  last be- 
 ing  called  the  Grey  Annals,  companion to  the Annals  of Aman 
 and belonging to the  same time  (p. 310).  But unlike  the Annals 
 of  Aman,  the  Grey  Annals were  left unfinished  at the  end of 
 the  story  of  Turin  Turambar;  and both  as prose  narrative and 
 still more  as definitive  history of  the end  of the  Elder Days 
 from the  time  of  The  Lord  of the  Rings their  abandonment is 
 grievous.                                                          
  The   earliest   Annals  of   Beleriand  ('AB')   are  themselves 
 found in  two versions,  which I  shall call  AB I  and AB  II. AB 
 I is a complete text to the end of the First Age;  AB II  is quite 
 brief, and though it  begins as  a fair  copy of  the much-emended 
 opening of I it soon becomes strongly divergent. In this chapter 
  I give both texts separately and in their  entirety, and  in what 
 follows I refer only to the earlier, AB I.                      
 This  is a  good, clear  manuscript, but  the style  suggests very 
 rapid composition. For much of its length the entries are in the 
 present tense and often  staccato, even  with such  expressions as 
 'the  Orcs  got  between  them'  (annal  172),  though  by  subse- 
 quent  small  expansions  and  alterations here  and there  my fa- 
 ther slightly modified this  character. I  think that  his primary 
 intention  at  this time  was the  consolidation of  the historical 
 structure in its internal relations and  chronology -  the Annals 
 began,  perhaps,  in  parallel  with  the  Quenta as  a convenient 
 way of driving abreast, and  keeping track  of, the  different el- 
 ements  in  the  ever  more  complex  narrative  web.  Nonetheless 
 major new developments enter here.                                
    The manuscript was fairly heavily emended, though much 
                                  

 

  less so  towards the  end, and  from the  nature of  the changes, 
  largely  concerned  with  dating,  it  has  become  a complicated 
  document. To present it in its original form, with all  the later 
  changes  recorded  in  notes, would  make it  quite unnecessarily 
  difficult  to  follow,  and  indeed  would be  scarcely possible, 
  since many alterations were made  either at  the time  of writing 
  or in its immediate context. A later  'layer' of  pencilled emen- 
  dation, very largely concerned with names, is easily separable. 
  The text given here, therefore, is that of the  manuscript afier 
  all  the earlier  changes and  additions (in  ink) had  been made 
  to it, and these are only recorded in the notes in certain cases. 
  The later pencilled alterations are fully registered.             
    That  AB  I is  earlier than  the comparable  portion of  AV is 
  easily shown. Thus in AB I,  as in  Q ($8),  there is  no mention 


210 

  of  Fingolfin's  march  to  Angband  immediately on  his arrival, 
  whereas it appears in  AV (p.  320); again  as in  Q and  in con- 
  trast to AV (p. 318) the Battle under Stars was fought, and       
  Feanor  died,  before  the  encampment  in Mithrim.  Further, the 
  names  Dagor-os-Giliath  and  Eredwethion  are  added  in  pencil 
  in AB I, whereas in AV they appear in the text as first written, 
  and   Erydlomin   still   means   the  Shadowy   Mountains  (see 
  p. 333). That AB I is  later than  Q is  shown by  a multiplicity 
  of features, as will be seen from the Commentary.                 
    There follows the text of AB I.                                 
                                                                   
                         ANNALS OF BELERIAND.                       
                                                                   
    Morgoth flees from Valinor with the Silmarils, the magic        
  gems of Feanor, and returns into the Northern World and,          
  rebuilds his fortress of Angband beneath the Black Moun-          
  tain, Thangorodrim. He devises the Balrogs and the Orcs.          
  The Silmarils are set in Morgoth's iron crown.                    
    The Gnomes of the eldest house, the Dispossessed, come          
  into the North under Feanor and his seven sons, with their        
  friends Orodreth, Angrod, and Egnor, sons of Finrod.' They        
  burn the Telerian ships.                                          
    First of the Battles with Morgoth,' the Battle under Stars.     
  Feanor defeats the Orcs, but is mortally wounded by               

 

 Gotmog captain of Balrogs, and dies. Maidros, his eldest 
 son, is ambushed and captured and hung on Thangorodrim. 
 The sons of Feanor camp about Lake Mithrim in the North- 
 west, behind the Shadowy Mountains.(3) 
                                                              
 Year 1.     Here Sun  and Moon,  made by  the Gods  after the 
             death of the Two Trees  of Valinor,  appear. Thus 
             measured  time  came   into  the   Hither  Lands. 
             Fingolfin leads  the second  house of  the Gnomes 
             over the straits of Grinding Ice into  the Hither 
             Lands.  With   him  came   the  son   of  Finrod, 
             Felagund,4  and  part  of  the third  or youngest 
             house.  They  march  from  the  North as  the Sun 
             rises, and unfurl their banners; and they come to 
             Mithrim,  but  there  is  feud' between  them and 
             the sons of  Feanor. Morgoth  at coming  of Light 
             retreats into his deepest dungeons,  but smithies 
             in secret, and sends forth black clouds.          
                                                              
     2.      Fingon son of Fingolfin heals the feud  by rescu- 
             ing Maidros.                                      
                                                              
   1-100.    The  Gnomes  explore  and  settle  Beleriand, and 
             all the vale of Sirion from' the Great Sea to the 
             Blue Mountains,' except for  Doriath in  the cen- 
             tre where Thingol and Melian reign.               
                                                              
      20.    Feast  and Games  of Reuniting  were held  in Nan 
             Tathrin, the Land of Willows,  near the  delta of 
             Sirion,  between the  Elves of  Valinor returning 
             and  the  Dark-elves, both  those of  the Western 
             Havens (Brithombar and  Eldorest)(8) and  the scat- 
             tered  Wood-elves  of  the West,  and ambassadors 
             of Thingol. A time of peace followed.(9)          
                                                              
      50.    Morgoth's might begins to move once more.         
                                                              
             Earthquakes  in  the  North.  Orc-raids begin. 
             Turgon son  of Fingolfin  is great  in friendship 

 

 with   Felagund  son   of  Finrod;   but  Orodreth, 
 Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of Finrod,  are friends 
 of  the  sons  of  Feanor, especially  Celegorm and 
 Curufin.                                           


211 

                                                   
50. Turgon  and  Felagund  are troubled  by dreams 
 and  forebodings.  Felagund  finds  the  caves  of 
 Narog  and   established  his   armouries  there.(10) 
 Turgon   alone  discovers   the  hidden   vale  of 
 Gondolin. Being still troubled  in heart  he gath- 
 ers  folk  about  him  and  departs  from Hithlum, 
 the  Land  of  Mist   about  Mithrim,   where  his 
 brother Fingon remains.                            
                                                   
 51 The Gnomes drive back the  Orcs again,  and the 
 Siege  of  Angband  is laid.  The North  has great 
 peace  and  quiet   again.  Fingolfin   holds  the 
 North-west  and  all Hithlum,  and is  overlord of 
 the Dark-elves west of Narog.  His might  is gath- 
 ered  on  the  slopes  of  Erydlomin(11) the Shadowy 
 Mountains  and  thence  watches and  traverses the 
 great  plains  of  Bladorion  up  to the  walls of 
 Morgoth's   mountains   in  the   North.  Felagund 
 holds  the vale  of Sirion  save Doriath,  and has 
 his  seat"  beside  Narog  in  the South,  but his 
 might is gathered  in the  North guarding  the ac- 
 cess to  Sirion's vale  between Erydlomin  and the 
 mountainous  region  of  Taur-na-Danion,  the for- 
 est of pines. He has a fortress on a rocky isle in 
 the midst of Sirion, Tolsirion. His brothers dwell 
 in  the  centre  about  Taur-na-Danion  and  scour 
 Bladorion thence, and  join in  the East  with the 
 sons  of  Feanor.  The  fortress  of  the  sons  of 
 Feanor  is  upon  Himling, but  they roam  and hunt 
 all the  woods of  East Beleriand  even up  to the 
 Blue  Mountains.  Thither  at  times  many  of the 
 Elf-lords go for hunting. But  none get  tidings of 
 Turgon and his folk.                               

 

                           
                                                           
    70.  Beor born in the East.                             
                                                           
 88. 90. Haleth, and Hador the Goldenhaired, born in the 
                                                           
         East.                                              
                                                           
   100.  Felagund hunting in the East comes upon Beor       
         the mortal and his Men who have wandered into      
         Beleriand. Beor becomes a vassal of Felagund       
         and goes west with him. Bregolas son of Beor       
         born.                                              
                                                           
   102.  Barahir son of Beor born.                          
                                                           
   120.  Haleth   comes  into   Beleriand;  also   Hador  the 
         Goldenhaired  and  his   great  companies   of  Men. 
         Haleth  remains  in  Sirion*s  vale,  but  Hador be- 
         comes  a  vassal  of  Fingolfin and  strengthens his 
         armies and is given lands in Hithlum.              
                                                           
         113 Hundor  son  of  Haleth  born.  117  Gundor son 
         of  Hador  born.  119 Gumlin  son of  Hador born.'-' 
                                                           
   122.  The   strength   of   Men   being   added   to   the 
         Gnomes,   Morgoth   is   straitly    enclosed.   The 
         Gnomes  deem   the  siege   of  Angband   cannot  be 
         broken,  but  Morgoth   ponders  new   devices,  and 
         bethinks  him  of  Dragons.  The  Men  of  the three 
         houses  grow  and multiply,  and are  gladly subject 
         to  the  Elf-lords,  and  learn  many crafts  of the 
         Gnomes.  The  Men  of  Beor   were  dark   or  brown 
         of  hair  but  fair  of  face,  with  grey  eyes; of 


212 

         shapely  form,  of  great  courage   and  endurance, 
         but little greater than the Elves  of that  day. The 
         folk  of  Hador  were  yellow-haired  and  blue-eyed 
         and of great  stature and  strength. Like  unto them 
         but  somewhat  shorter  and  more  broad   were  the 
         folk of Haleth.                                    

 

 124. 128.  Baragund and Belegund, sons of Bregolas son        
            of Beor, born.                                     
                                                              
       132. Beren, after named the Ermabwed (14) or One-           
            handed," son of Barahir, born.                     
                                                              
       141. Hurin the Steadfast, son of Gumlin, born,          
                                                              
            Handir son of Hundor son of Haleth born.           
                                                              
       144. Huor Hurin's brother born.                         
                                                              
       145. Morwen  Elfsheen,  daughter  of   Baragund,  born. 
                                                              
       150. Rian  daughter  of   Belegund,  mother   of  Tuor, 
            born. Beor  the Old,  Father of  Men, dies  of old 
            age in Beleriand. The Elves see for the first time 
            the  death  of  weariness,  and  sorrow  over  the 
            short  span  allotted to  Men. Bregolas  rules the 
            house of Beor.                                     
                                                              
 *   155.   Morgoth  unlooses  his might,  and seeks  to break 
            into  Beleriand.  The  Battle  begins on  a sudden 
            on  a  night  of mid-winter  and falls  first most 
            heavily  on  the  sons of  Finrod and  their folk. 
            This is the Battle of Sudden Fire. Rivers  of fire 
            flow  from   Thangorodrim.  Glomund   the  golden, 
            Father  of  Dragons,   appears."  The   plains  of 
            Bladorion are turned into  a great  desert without 
            green, and called  after Dor-na-Fauglith,  Land of 
            Gasping Thirst.                                    
               Here were Bregolas slain, and the  greater part 
            of  the  warriors  of  Beor's  house.  Angrod  and 
            Egnor sons of  Finrod fell.  Barahir and  his cho- 
            sen   champions   saved  Felagund   and  Orodreth, 
            and Felagund swore a great  oath of  friendship to 
            his  kin and  seed. Barahir  rules the  remnant of 
            the house of Beor.                                 

 

   
                                                        
 155 Fingolfin and Fingon marched to the aid of their 
 kin,  but  were  driven  back  with  great  loss. Hador, 
 now  aged,  fell  defending  his  lord   Fingolfin,  and 
 with  him  Gundor  his  son.   Gumlin  took   the  lord- 
 ship of Hador's house.                                  
   The   sons   of   Feanor    were   not    slain,   but 
 Celegorm   and   Curufin   were   defeated    and   fled 
 with  Orodreth   son  of   Finrod.  Maidros   the  left- 
 handed  did   deeds  of   great  prowess,   and  Morgoth 
 did  not  take  Himling  as  yet,  but  he   broke  into 
 the  passes  east  of  Himling  and  ravaged  into  East 
 Beleriand   and   scattered   the  Gnomes   of  Feanor's 
 house.                                                  
   Turgon  was  not  at  that   battle,  nor   Haleth  or 
 any  but  few of  his folk.  It is  said that  Hurin was 
 at  foster  with  Haleth,  and  that  Haleth  and  Hurin 
 hunting   in   Sirion's   vale   came   upon   some   of 
 Turgon's  folk,  and  were   brought  into   the  secret 
 vale  of  Gondolin,  whereof   of  those   outside  none 
 yet   knew   save   Thorndor   King   of   Eagles;   for 
 Turgon   had   messages   and   dreams   sent   by   the 


213 

 God   Ulmo,   Lord   of   Waters,   up   Sirion  warning 
 him   that   help   of  Men   was  necessary   for  him. 
 But   Haleth   and   Hurin   swore   oaths   of  secrecy 
 and   never  revealed   Gondolin,  but   Haleth  learned 
 something   of   the  counsels   of  Turgon,   and  told 
 them  after  to  Hurin.  Great  liking  had  Turgon  for 
 the  boy  Hurin   and  would   keep  him   in  Gondolin, 
 but  the  grievous  tidings  of  the  great  battle came 
 and   they   departed.   Turgon  sends   secret  messen- 
 gers  to  Sirion's  mouths  and  begins  a  building of 
 ships.  Many  set  sail  for   Valinor,  but   none  re- 
 turn.'"                                                 
   Fingolfin  seeing  the  ruin   of  [the]   Gnomes  and 
 the  defeat  of  all  their   houses  was   filled  with 
 wrath  and  despair,  and  rode  alone  to the  gates of 
 Angband    and    challenged    Morgoth     to    single 
 con;bat.   Fingolfin  was   slain,  but   Thorndor  res- 

 

       cued his body, and set it in a  cairn on  the moun- 
       tains north of  Gondolin to  guard that  valley, and 
       so  came  the  tidings  thither.  Fingon  ruled  the 
       royal house of [the] Gnomes.                        
                                                          
  157. Morgoth  took  Tolsirion  and pierced  the passes 
       into  West  Beleriand.  There he  set Thu  the wiz- 
       ard,  and  Tolsirion  became  a  place   of  evil.(20) 
       Felagund  and   Orodreth,  together   with  Celegorm 
       and  Curufin,  retreated  to Nargothrond,  and made 
       there a great  hidden palace  after the  fashion of 
       Thingol in" the Thousand Caves in Doriath.          
           Barahir will not retreat and holds out still in 
       Taur-na-Danion.   Morgoth   hunts  them   down  and 
       turns   Taur-na-Danion  into   a  region   of  great 
       dread, so  that it  was after  called Taur-na-Fuin, 
       the   Forest   of   Night,    or   Math-Fuin-delos (22) 
       Deadly  Nightshade.  Only   Barahir  and   his  son 
       Beren,  and  his   nephews  Baragund   and  Belegund 
       sons   of   Bregolas   and   a  few   men  remain.(23) The 
       wives   of   Baragund   and   Belegund   and   their 
       young   daughters   Morwen   and  Rian   were  sent (24) 
       into Hithlum to the keeping of Gumlin.              
                                                          
  158. Haleth and his folk lead a woodland life in         
       woods about Sirion on the west marches o            
       Doriath and harry the Orc-bands.(25)                
                                                          
  160. Barahir  was  betrayed  by   Gorlim,  and   all  his 
       company  is  slain  by  the  Orcs  save   Beren  who 
       was  hunting  alone.  Beren  pursues  the  Orcs  and 
       slays  his  father's  slayer  and  retakes  the ring 
       which  Felagund  gave   to  Barahir.   Beren  becomes 
       a solitary outlaw.                                  
                                                          
  162. Renewed assaults of Morgoth. The Orc-raids en-      
       compass Doriath, protected by the magic of Me-      
       lian the divine, west down Sirion and eas           

 

  
                                                  
 beyond  Himling.  Beren   is  driven   south  and 
 comes  hardly  into Doriath.  Gumlin slain  in an 
 assault  upon  the fortress  of Fingon  at Sirion's 
 Well  in  the  west of  Erydlomin.(27) Hurin  his son 
 is  mighty  in  strength.   He  is   summoned  to 
 Hithlum  and  comes  there  hardly. He  rules the 
 house of Hador and serves Fingon.                 
                                                  
 163  The  Swarthy  Men first  come into  East Be- 
 leriand. They were short, broad, long  and strong 


214 

 in  the  arm,  growing  much  hair  on  face  and 
 breast,  and this  was dark  as were  their eyes; 
 their skins were  sallow or  dark, but  most were 
 not  uncomely.  Their   houses  were   many,  and 
 many had liking  rather for  the (28) Dwarves  of the 
 mountains, of  Nogrod and  Belegost, than  for the 
 Elves. Of the Dwarves the Elves first  learned in 
 these days, and their friendship was small. It is 
 not  known whence  they are,  save that  they are 
 not of Elf-kin, nor of mortal, nor of Morgoth, 
 But  Maidros  seeing the  weakness of  the Gnomes 
 and  the waxing  power of  the armies  of Morgoth 
 made  alliance  with the  new-come Men,  and with 
 the houses of Bor  and of  Ulfand.(30) The  sons of 
 Ulfand  were  Uldor,  after called  the Accursed, 
 and  Ulfast, and  Ulwar; and  by Cranthir  son of 
 Feanor  were  they most  beloved, and  they swore 
 fealty to him.                                    
                                                  
 163-4 The great geste of Beren and Luthien.(31) King 
 Felagund  of Nargothrond  dies in  Tolsirion (32 in 
 the  dungeons  of  Thu.  Orodreth   rules  Nargo- 
 thrond  and  breaks  friendship with  Celgorm and 
 Curufin  who  are  expelled.(33) Luthien  and Huan 
 overthrow   Thu.   Beren   and   Luthien   go  to 
 Angband  and recover  a Silmaril.  Carcharoth the 
 great wolf of  Angband with  the Silmaril  in his 

 

         belly  bursts  into  Doriath.  Beren md  the hound 
         Huan  are  slain  by  Carcharoth,  but  Huan slays 
         Carcharoth and the Silmaril is regained.           
           Beren  was  recalled  from  the dead  by Luthien 
         and dwelt  with her (34) in the  Land of  Seven Riv- 
         ers, Ossiriand, out  of the  knowledge of  Men end 
         Elves.(35)                                         
                                                           
  164.   Hurin weds Morwen.                                 
                                                           
  165.   Turin son of Hurin born in winter with sad,        
         omens.(35)                                         
                                                           
 165-70. The  Union  of  Maidros.  Maidros   enheartened  by 
         the deeds of  Beren and  Luthien plans  a reuniting 
         of  forces  for  the  driving  back of  Morgoth. But 
         because  of  the  deeds  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin 
         he  receives  no  help   from  Thingol,   and  only 
         small   support   from   Nargothrond,   where   the 
         Gnomes  attempt  to  guard  themselves  by  stealth 
         and   secrecy.   He  gathers   and  arms   all  the 
         Gnomes  of  Feanor's   house,  and   multitudes  of 
         the  Dark-elves,  and  of  Men, in  East Beleriand. 
         He  gets  help  in  smithying  of the  Dwarves, and 
         sun<mons  yet  more  Men  over  the  mountains  out 
         of the East.                                       
           Tidings  come  to  Turgon  the  hidden   king  an 
         he prepares in secret for war,  for his  people who 
         were  not  at  the  Second Battle  will not  be re- 
         strained.                                          
                                                           
  167.   Dior the Beautiful born to Beren and Luthien in    
                                                           
         Ossiriand.                                         
                                                           
    168. Haleth, last of  the Fathers  of Men,  dies. Hundor 
         rules his folk.  The Orcs  are slowly  driven back 
         out of Beleriand.                                  

 

             
                                                           


215 

        171 Isfin daughter of Turgon strays out  of Gondolin 
        and is taken to wife by Eol a Dark-elf.             
                                                           
     *  172 The year of sorrow. Maidros plans  an assault 
        upon  Angband,  from  West  and  East.  Fingon is 
        to  march  forth  as soon  as Maidros'  main host 
        gives the signal in the East  of Dor-na-Fauglith. 
        Huor  son  of  Hador (37) weds  Rian   daughter  of 
        Belegund on the  eve of  battle and  marches with 
        Hurin his brother in the army of Fingon.            
           The  Battle  of  Unnumbered Tears,"  the third 
        battle  of  the  Gnomes  and Morgoth,  was fought 
        upon  the  plains  of Dor-na-Fauglith  before the 
        pass in which  the young  waters of  Sirion enter 
        Beleriand   between   Erydlomin (39) and Taur-na- 
        Fuin. The place was long marked  by a  great hill 
        in which the  slain, Elves  and Men,  were piled. 
        Grass  grew there  alone in  Dor-na-Fauglith. The 
        Elves  and  Men were  utterly defeated  and their 
        ruin accomplished.                                  
           Maidros  was  hindered  on  the  road  by  the 
        machinations   of   Uldor   the   Accursed   whom 
        Morgoth's  spies  had  bought.   Fingon  attacked 
        without  waiting and  drove in  Morgoth's feinted 
        attack,  even  to  Angband.  The  companies  from 
        Nargothrond burst  into his  gates, but  they and 
        their  leader  Flinding son  of Fuilin<  were all 
        taken;  and  Morgoth  now  released  a  countless 
        army  and  drove  the  Gnomes back  with terrible 
        slaughter. Hundor son  of Haleth  and the  Men of 
        the  wood were  slain in  the retreat  across the 
        sands.  The  Orcs  got   between  them   and  the 
        passes into Hithlum,  and they  retreated towards 
        Tolsirion.                                          
           Turgon and  the army  of Gondolin  sound their 
        horns  and  issue  out  of  Taur-na-Fuin. Fortune 
        wavers  and  the  Gnomes  begin  to  gain ground. 
        Glad meeting of Hurin and Turgon.                   

 

   The  trumpets  of  Maidros  heard  in  the East, 
 and  the  Gnomes take heart.  The  Elves  say vic- 
 tory might have been theirs yet but for Uldor. 
 But Morgoth now sent forth all the folk of        
 Angband   and   Hell   was  emptied.   There  came 
 afresh a hundred thousand Orcs and a thousand 
 Balrogs, and in the forefront came Glomund the 
 Dragon,   and  Elves   and  Men   withered  before 
 him. Thus the union of the hosts of Fingon and 
 Maidros was broken. But Uldor went over to        
 Morgoth and fell on the right flank of  the sons 
 of Feanor.                                        
   Cranthir  slew  Uldor,  but  Ulfast   and  Ulwar 
 slew  Bor  and  his  three sons  and many  Men who 
 were faithful and  the host  of Maidros  was scat- 
 tered to the winds and fled far into hiding into 
 East Beleriand and the mountains there.           
   Fingon fell in the  West, and  it is  said flame 
 sprang  from  his  helm  as  he  was  smitten down 
 by  the  Balrogs.  Hurin  and  the Men  of Hithlum 
 of  Hador's  house,  and  Huor his  brother, stood 
 firm, and the Orcs could not pass into Beleriand. 
 The  stand  of  Hurin  is  the most  renowned deed 
 of Men among the Elves. He held the rear while 
 Turgon with part of  his battle,  and some  of the 
 remnant of Fingon's host,  escaped into  the dales 
 and   mountains.  They   vanished  and   were  not 
 again found by Elf or by spy of Morgoth until 
 Tuor's  day.  Thus  was  Morgoth's  victory marred 
 and he was greatly angered.                       


216 

   Hurin fought on after Huor  fell pierced  with a 
 venomed  arrow, and  until he  alone was  left. He 
 threw  away  his  shield  and  fought with  an axe 
 and slew a hundred Orcs.                          
   Hurin   was  taken   alive  by   Morgoth's  com- 
 mand   and  dragged   to  Angband   where  Morgoth 
 cursed  him  and  his kin,  and because  he would. 
 not  reveal  where  Turgon  was  gone  chained him 

 

  with   enchanted   sight   on  Thangorodrim   to  see 
  the evil that befell his wife  and children.  His son 
  Turin  was  nigh  three  years  old,(41) and  his  wife 
  Morwen was again with child.                          
    The    Orcs   piled    the   slain    and   entered 
  Beleriand  to  ravage.  Rian  sought  for  Huor,  for 
  no tidings  came to  Hithlum of  the battle,  and her 
  child  Tuor  son  of  Huor  was  born  to her  in the 
  wild.  He  was  taken   to  nurture   by  Dark-elves, 
  but  Rian  went  to  the  Mound  of Slain (42) and laid 
  her down to die there.(43)                              
                                                       
  173 Morgoth took all Beleriand or filled it with rov- 
  ing  bands  of  Orcs  and  wolves,  but   there  held 
  still  Doriath.  Of Nargothrond  he heard  little, of 
  Gondolin    he    could    discover    nothing.    In 
  Beleriand  outside  these  three  places  only  scat- 
  tered   Elves   and  Men   lived  in   outlawry,  and 
  among  them  the  remnant  of  Haleth's   folk  under 
  Handir, son of Hundor, son of Haleth,'4               
    Morgoth   broke   his  pledges   to  the   sons  of 
  Ulfand,(45) and  drove  the  evil  Men  into  Hithlum, 
  without  reward,  save  that  they  there ill-treated 
  and  enslaved the  remnants  of  Hador's  house,  the 
  old  men  and  the  women  and  children.   The  rem- 
  nants  of  the Elves  of Hithlum  also he  mostly en- 
  slaved  and  took  to  the  mines  of   Angband,  and 
  others  he  forbade  to   leave  Hithium,   and  they 
  were  slain  if  Orcs  found  them  east or  south of 
  the   Shadowy   Mountains.(46) Nienor   the  sorrowful, 
  daughter  of  Hurin  and  Morwen,  born   in  Hithlum 
  in the beginning of the year.                         
    Tuor  grew  up  wild  in  the  woods   among  fugi- 
  tive  Elves   nigh  the   shores  of   Mithrim;(47) but 
  Morwen   sent   Turin   to   Doriath    begging   for 
  Thingol's  fostering   and  aid,   for  she   was  of 
  Beren's  kindred.  They  have  a  desperate  journey, 
  the boy of seven and his two guides.(48)              

 

  181    The  power  of  Morgoth  waxes  and  Doriath  is  cut 
         off  and  no  tidings  of the  outer world  reach it. 
         Turin  though  not  fully  grown  takes  to   war  on 
         the marches in company of Beleg.                     
                                                             
  184    Turin slays Orgof, kinsman of the royal house,       
         and flees from Thingol's court.                       
                                                             
 184-7   Turin  an  outlaw  in  the woods.  He gathers  a des- 
         perate  band,   and  plunders   on  the   marches  of 
         Doriath and beyond.                                  
                                                             
         187 Turin's companions capture Beleg. But Turin re- 
         leases  him  and they  renew their  fellowship, and 
         make  war  on  the  Orcs,  adventuring  far  beyond 
         Doriath.(49)                                         
                                                             
  189    Blodrin  Ban's  son betrays  their hiding  place, and 
         Turin  is  taken  alive. Beleg  healed of  his wounds 
         follows  in  pursuit.  He  comes  upon  Flinding  son 
         of  Fuilin,(50) who  escaped  from  Morgoth's mines; 


217 

         together  they  rescue  Turin,'rom  the  Orcs.  Turin 
         slays Beleg by misadventure.                         
                                                             
  190    Turin  healed  of  his  madness  by   Ivrin's  well,(51) 
         and   is   brought   at    last   by    Flinding   to 
         Na-gothrond.  They  are  admitted  on  the  prayer of 
         Finduilas  daughter  of  Orodreth,  who   had  before 
         loved Flinding.                                      
                                                             
 190-5   The   sojourn  of   Turin  in   Nargothrond.  Beleg's 
         sword  is  reforged  and  Turin  rejects  his ancient 
         name   and   is   renowned   as    Mormegil   (Morma- 
         kil)(52) 'Black-Sword'.    He    calls    his   sword 
         Gurtholfin   'Wand   of  Death'.   Finduilas  forgets 
         her  love  of  Flinding,  and  is  beloved  of Turin, 
         who  will not  reveal his  love out  of faithfulness 
         to  Flinding;  nonetheless  Flinding  is  embittered. 

 

         
                                                          
        Turin  becomes  a  great  captain.  He   leads  the 
        Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  to  victory and  their an- 
        cient  secrecy  is  broken.  Morgoth learns  of the 
        growing  strength  of  the  stronghold,"   but  the 
        Orcs  are  driven  out  of  all  the  land  between 
        Narog  and  Sirion  and  Doriath  to the  East, and 
        West  to  the  Sea,  and  North  to  Erydlomin.(54) A 
        bridge  is  built  over  Narog.  The   Gnomes  ally 
        them with Haleth's folk under Handir.              
                                                          
  192   Meglin comes to Gondolin and is received by        
                                                          
        Turgon as his sister's child.                      
                                                          
  194   In this time of betterment Morwen and Nienor       
        leave Hithlum and seek tidings of Turin in         
        Doriath. There many speak of the prowess of        
        Mormakil,(55) but of Turin none know tidings.       
                                                          
  195   Glomund   with   a   host   of   Orcs   comes  over 
        Erydlomin   and   defeats   the    Gnomes   between 
        Narog and Taiglin. Handir  is slain.  Flinding dies 
        refusing succour  of Turin.  Turin hastens  back to 
        Nargothrond  but it  is sacked  ere his  coming. He 
        is    deceived    and   spellbound    by   Glomund. 
        Finduilas   and  the   women  of   Nargothrond  are 
        taken  as  thralls, but  Turin deceived  by Glomund 
        goes to Hithlum to seek Morwen.                    
           News  comes  to  Doriath  that   Nargothrond  is 
        taken and Mormakil is Turin.                       
           Tuor  was  led out  of Hithlum  by a  secret way 
        under  Ulmo's  guidance,  and  journeyed  along the 
        coast  past  the  ruined  havens of  Brithombar and 
        Eldorest (56) and reached Sirion's mouth."            
                                                          
 195-6  Turin  goes  to  Hithlum   and  finds   his  mother 
        gone.  He slays  Brodda and  escapes. He  joins the 
        Woodmen  and  becomes  their  lord,  since  Brandir 
        son  of  Handir  is lame  from childhood.  He takes 

 

        name of Turambar (Turumarth)(58) 'Conqueror of        
        Fate'.                                             
                                                          
 196    Here  Tuor  meets   Bronweg  at   Sirion's  mouth. 
        Ulmo himself  appears to  him in  Nan-tathrin; ang 
        Tuor   and   Bronweg    guided   by    Ulmo   find 
        Gondolin.  They  are  received  after questioning, 
        and  Tuor  speaks  the  embassy  of  Ulmo.  Turgon 
        does not now harken to it,  partly because  of the 


218 

        urging  of  Meglin.  But  Tuor  for  his kindred's 
        sake is held in great honour.                      
           Morwen    goes    to    Nargothrond,    whither 
        Glomund has returned and lies  on the  treasure of 
        Felagund. She seeks for  tidings of  Turin. Nienor 
        against her bidding rides in disguise with her es- 
        cort of Elves of the folk of Thingol.              
           Glomund  lays  a  spell  on  the   company  and 
        disperses it.  Morwen vanishes  in the  woods; and 
        a great darkness of mind comes on Nienor.          
           Turin  found  Nienor  hunted  by  the  Orcs. He 
        names  her  Niniel,  the  tearful, since  she knew 
        not her name, and himself Turambar.                
                                                          
 197-8  Nienor  Niniel  dwells  with  the Woodfolk  and is 
        beloved   by  Turin   Turambar  and   Brandir  the 
        lame.                                              
                                                          
  198   Turin weds Nienor.                                 
                                                          
  199   Glomund   seeks  out   the  dwellings   of  Turin. 
        Turin  slays  him with  Gurtholfin his  sword; but 
        falls  aswoon  beside him.  Nienor finds  him, but 
        Glomund  ere  death  releases  her from  the spell 
        and  declares  her  kindred. Nienor  casts herself 
        away over the waterfall  in that  place.(59) Brandir 
        reveals the truth to  Turin and  is slain  by him, 
        Turin bids Gurtholfin  slay him,  and he  dies. So 
        ended  the  worst  of  Morgoth's  evil;  but Hurin 

 

             
                                                        
     was  released  from  Angband,  bowed  as  with age, 
     and sought for Morwen.                              
      Tuor   weds   Idril   Celebrindal    daughter   of 
     [Turgon  of]  Gondolin, and  earns the  secret hate 
     of Meglin.                                          
                                                        
 200 Here was born Earendel the Bright, the star of 
     the   Two   Kindreds,  unto   Tuor  and   Idril  in 
     Gondolin.  Here  was  born  also Elwing  the White, 
     fairest  of  women  save  Luthien,  unto   Dior  in 
     Ossiriand.                                          
      Hurin  gathers  men  unto   him.  They   find  the 
     treasure   of   Nargothrond   and   slay   Mim  the 
     Dwarf  who had  taken it  to himself.  The treasure 
     is  cursed.  The  treasure  is brought  to Thingol. 
     But   Hurin  departs   from  Doriath   with  bitter 
     words, but  of his  fate and  of Morwen's  after no 
     certain tidings are known.                          
                                                        
 201 Thingol employs the Dwarves to smithy  his gold 
     and  silver  and  the treasure  of Narog,  and they 
     make   the   renowned   Nauglafring,(60) the  Dwarf- 
     necklace,  whereon  is  hung  the  Silmaril. Enmity 
     awakes (60) between  the   Elves  and   Dwarves,  and 
     the Dwarves are driven away.                        
                                                        
 202  Here  the  Dwarves  invaded  Doriath  aided by 
     treachery,  for  many  Elves  were smitten  with the 
     accursed lust  of the  treasure. Thingol  was slain 
     and  the  Thousand  Caves  sacked.  But  Melian the 
     divine  could   not  be   taken  and   departed  to 
     Ossiriand.                                          
        Beren"   summoned   by   Melian   overthrew  the 
     Dwarves  at  Sarn-Athra (63) and  cast the  gold into 
     the  River  Asgar,  which  afterwards   was  called 
     Rathlorion (64) the  Golden-bed;  but   the  Naugla- 
     fring and the  Silmaril he  took. Luthien  wore the 


219 

     necklace  and  the  Silmaril  on  her  breast. Here 

 

       Beren  and  Luthien  depart  out  of  men's knowl- 
       edge and their deathday is  not known;  save that 
       at night  a messenger  brought the  necklace unto 
       Dior  in  Doriath, and  the Elves  said: 'Luthien 
       and Beren are dead as Mandos doomed.'             
          Dior  son  of  Luthien  and  Beren,  Thingol's 
       heir, returned unto Doriath and  for a  while re- 
       established it, but Melian  went back  to Valinor 
       and he had no longer her protection.              
                                                        
  203  The  necklace  came to  Dior; he  wore it  on his 
       breast.                                           
                                                        
  205  The sons of Feanor hear  tidings of  the Silmaril 
       in the East, and gather  from wandering  and hold 
       council.  They  summon  Dior   to  give   up  the 
       jewel.                                            
                                                        
  206  Here Dior fought the sons of Feanor on the east . 
       marches of Doriath. but he was slain. Celegorm: 
       and Curufin and Cranthir fell in battle. The      
       young sons of Dior, Elboron and Elbereth, were 
       slain by the evil men of Maidros' host, and       
       Maidros bewailed the foul deed. The maiden        
       Elwing was saved by faithful Elves and taken to 
       Sirion's mouth, and with them they took the      
       jewel and the necklace.                           
          Meglin was taken in the hills and betrayed 
       Gondolin to Morgoth.                              
                                                        
  207  Here Morgoth loosed  a host  of dragons  over the 
       mountains  from  the  North  and  Gondolin's vale 
       was  taken  and  the  city  besieged.   The  Orcs 
       sacked  Gondolin  and  destroyed  the   king  and 
       most of his  people; but  Ecthelion of  the Foun- 
       tain slew there  Gothmog lord  of Balrogs  ere he 
       fell.                                             

 

        
                                                         
         Tuor  slew  Meglin.  Tuor,  Idril,  and Earendel 
       escaped  by  a  secret  way  devised by  Idril and 
       came to Cristhorn, Eagles' Cleft,  a high  pass be- 
       neath Fingolfin's cairn  in the  North. Glorfindel 
       was  there  slain  in  an  ambush,   but  Thorndor 
       saved  the  remnant  of  Gondolin,  and  they  es- 
       caped at last into the vale of Sirion.             
         The  ruin  of  the   Elves  was   now  well-nigh 
       complete, and no refuge or  strong place  or realm 
       remained to them.                                  
                                                         
  208  Here  the  wanderers  from  Gondolin  reached  the 
       mouths  of  Sirion  and  joined  with  the slender 
       company  of  Elwing.  The  Silmaril  brings bless- 
       ing  upon  them  and  they  multiply,   and  build 
       ships  and  a  haven,  and  dwell  upon  the delta 
       amid the waters. Fugitives gather to them.       
                                                         
  210  Maidros hears of the  upspringing of  Sirion's Ha- 
       ven and that a Silmaril is there, but he forswears 
       his oath.                                          
                                                         
  224  The  Unquiet  of  Ulmo  comes  upon  Tuor  and  he 
       builds the  ship Earame,  Eagle's Pinion,  and de- 
       parts with Idril into the West and is heard  of no 
       more.  Earendel  weds  Elwing and  is lord  of the 
       folk of Sirion.                                    


220 

                                                         
  225  Torment  of  Maidros and  his brothers  because of 
       their oath. Damrod and Diriel  resolve to  win the 
       Silmaril if Earendel will not yield it.            
          Here   unquiet  came   upon  Earendel   and  he 
       voyaged the  seas afar  seeking Tuor,  and seeking 
       Valinor, but  he found  neither. The  marvels that 
       he  did  and  saw  were  very  many  and renowned. 
       Elrond Half-elfin, son of Earendel, was born.      
          The  folk  of  Sirion  refused  to give  up the 

 

         Silmaril in Earendel's absence, and they thought 
         their joy and prosperity came of it.             
                                                         
  229    Here  Damrod  and  Diriel  ravaged   Sirion,  and 
         were  slain.  Maidros  and Maglor  gave reluctant 
         aid. Sirion's folk were slain  or taken  into the 
         company  of  Maidros.  Elrond  was taken  to nur- 
         ture  by  Maglor.  Elwing  cast herself  with the 
         Silmaril into the sea, but by  Ulmo's aid  in the 
         shape of a bird  flew to  Earendel and  found him 
         returning.                                       
                                                         
  230    Earendel  binds  the  Silmaril  on  his  brow and 
         with Elwing sails in search of Valinor.          
                                                         
  233    Earendel  comes  unto Valinor  and speaks  on be- 
         half of both races.                              
                                                         
  240    Maglor,  Maidros,  and   Elrond  with   few  free 
         Elves, the last  of the  Gnomes, live"  in hiding 
         from  Morgoth,  who rules  all Beleriand  and the 
         North, and thrusts ever East and South.          
                                                         
 233-43  The  sons  of  the Gods (66) under Fionwe  son of 
         Manwe  prepare  for  war.  The  Light-elves  arm, 
         but the Teleri do not leave Valinor,  though they 
         built a countless host of ships.                 
                                                         
  247    Fionwe's  host  draws  nigh  to the  Hither Lands 
         and his trumpets from the sea  ring in  the west- 
         ern  woods.  Here  was   fought  the   Battle  of 
         Eldorest,(67) where  Ingwil (68) son of Ingwe  made a 
         landing.  Great  war  comes  into  Beleriand, and 
         Fionwe  summons  all  Elves,  and   Dwarves,  and 
         Men,  and  Beasts,  and  birds to  his standards, 
         who do not elect  to fight  for Morgoth.  But the 
         power  and  dread  of  Morgoth  was   very  great, 
         and many did not obey.                           

 

        
                                                                        
* 250. Here Fionwe fought the last battle of the ancient                 
   North,   the  Great   or  Terrible   Battle.  Morgoth                 
   came  forth,  and  the hosts  were arrayed  on either                 
   side  of  Sirion.  But  the  host  of   Morgoth  were                 
   driven  as  leaves  and  the  Balrogs  destroyed  ut-                 
   terly,  and  Morgoth  fled  to  Angband   pursued  by                 
   the hosts of Fionwe.                                                  
   He  loosed  thence  all   the  winged   Dragons,  and                 
   Fionwe   was   driven   back   upon  Dor-na-Fauglith,                 
   but   Earendel   came  in   the  sky   and  overthrew                 
   Ancalagon  the   Black  Dragon,   and  in   his  fall                 
   Thangorodrim was broken.(69)                                          
   The   sons   of  the   Gods  wrestled   with  Morgoth                 
   in  his  dungeons  and  the   earth  shook   and  all                 
   Beleriand   was  shattered   and  changed   and  many                 
   perished, but Morgoth was bound.                                      
   Fionwe   departed   to   Valinor   with   the  Light-                 


221 

   elves  and  many   of  the   Gnomes  and   the  other                 
   Elves  of  the  Hither  Lands, but  Elrond Half-elfin                 
   remained  and  ruled  in  the  West  of   the  world.                 
   Maidros  and  Maglor  perished  in (70) a last endeav-                 
   our  to  seize  the   Silmarils  which   Fionwe  took                 
   from  Morgoth's  crown.(71) So  ended  the   First  Age                 
   of the World and Beleriand was no more.                               
                                                                        
                       NOTES.                                            
                                                                        
 1 This sentence, with their friends Orodreth,  Angrod, and  Egnor, sons 
 of Finrod, was an early addition; cf, the addition made to AV, note 21. 
 2 Later addition: Dagor-os-Giliath, which is found in AV as first writ- 
 ten, entry Valian Year 2996.                                            
 3 Later addition: (Eredwethion), which is found in AV as first written, 
 entry Valian Year 2996.- Pencilled in the margin against  this passage, 
 but then struck out, is:  The passage  of the  Gnomes into  Mithrim oc- 
 cupied equivalent of 10 years of' later time or 1 Valinorian  year. Cf, 
 AV, p. 318.                                                             
 4 This is an early alteration, going with that given in note l, of With 
 him come the sons of Finrod; cf. the  alteration made  to AV,  note 23, 
 An early alteration from: They march to Mithrim as  the Sun  rises, and 
 unfurl their banners; but there is feud ...                             

 

  6    Later addition: Belegar. This name  occurs in  the Old  English version 
       II of AV, p. 340 line 47.                                               
  7    Later addition: Eredlindon.  This name  occurs in  late additions  to Q 
       ($9 note 3) and AV (note 14).                                          
  8    Eldorest  >  Eglarest  >  Eglorest  (cf.  notes 56,  67). On  the Westward 
       extension  of  the  first  map  (see p.  281; see  insert) the  name is 
       Eldorest; in an  interpolation to  AV (note  18) it  is Eglorest;  in The 
       Silmarillion it is Eglarest.                                            
  9    The conclusion  of this  annal (very  probably changed  at the  time of 
       composition)  was originally:  A time  of peace  and growth.  Before the 
       Sun were only the pines and firs and dark....                           
 10    Later addition: at Nargothrond.                                         
  11   Erydlomin  >  Eredwethion  (twice;  later  changes).  See  note  3, and 
       pp. 233-4; 272.                                                         
  12   Later addition: at Nargothrond.                                         
  13   These three annals are placed here and written thus in  the manuscript, 
       and enclosed  in square  brackets. The  brackets perhaps  only indicate 
       that the annals are an addition (Gumlin's birth was first placed in the 
       annal 122, but  struck out  probably at  the time  of writing,  and the 
       mention of the  birth of  Handir son  of Hundor  was an  early addition 
       to annal 141).                                                          
  14   Later  change:  Ermabwed  >  Ermabuin.  Ermabwed  is  the  form  in the 
       Lay of the Children of Hurin and in Q ($10).                            
  15   Later addition: or Mablosgen the Empty-handed.                          
  16   Most of  the birth-dates  from 124  to 150  were changed  by a  year or 
       two, but since the figures were overwritten  the underlying  dates can- 
       not all be made out with certainty. The entry for the birth of Rian was 
       first given a separate entry under  the year  152; Rian  the sorrowful, 
       daughter of Belegund, born.                                             
  17   Later addition: Dagor Hurbreged.                                        
  18   Later addition: in full might.                                          
  19   These two sentences were an addition,  though a  very early  one: hence 
       the change of tense.                                                    
  20   Later addition: Tol-na-Gaurhoth, Isle of Werewolves.                    
  21   Later  addition:  Menegroth. This  name occurs  in an  interpolation to 
       AV (note 18) and in the Old English version II, p. 343 line 164.        
  22   Math-Fuin-delos   >  Gwath-Fuin-daidelos   (late  change).   On  delos, 
       daidelos see p. 307 third footnote and p. 322 note 27.                  
  23   Later addition: Gorlim,  Radros, Dengar,  & 7  others. Above  Dengar is 
       written (later) Dagnir.                                                 
  24   This sentence was struck through in pencil  and the  following replace- 
       ment written in: Their  wives and  children were  captured or  slain by 
       Morgoth,   save   Morwen  Eledwen   Elfsheen  (daughter   of  Baragund) 
       and Rian (daughter of Belegund), who were sent, &c.                     
  25   Following this the original text had: Haleth, last of the Fathers       


222 

 

                                  
                                                                                   
        Men,  dies  in  the  woods.  Hundor  his  son  rules  his  folk.  This was 
       struck  out  while  the Annals  were in  course of  composition, for  it re- 
       appears    later,    and    not    as    an    insertion     (year    168). 
   26  Sirion's Well > Eithyl Sirion  (later change).  Eithyl (of  which the  v is 
        uncertain) replaces an earlier form, probably Eothlin.                      
   27  Erydlomin    >     Eredwethion    (later     change;    cf.     note    11) 
   28  Later  addition:  nauglar  or (i.e.  for the  Nauglar or  Dwarves). Nauglar 
                                                                                   
        seems to have been changed from nauglir, the form in Q                      
   29  These two sentences, from Of the Dwarves..., bracketed in pencil;            
                                                                                   
        see pp. 404 - S.                                                            
   30  Ulfand is an early emendation from Ulband, and so also in the next          
                                                                                   
        sentence.                                                                   
   31   Later addition: Tinuviel, daughter of Thingol of Doriath.- For the          
        word geste see III. 154.                                                    
   32   Tolsirion > Tol-na-Gaurhoth (later change; cf. note 20),                    
                                                                                   
   33 Later addition: Nargothrond is hidden.                                        
   34 Later addition: among the Green-elves.                                        
                                                                                   
   35  Elves  >  Gnomes  (later  change,  depending  on  that  given in  note 34). 
   36  These two  entires, for  the years  164 arid  165, are  early replacements 
        of  essentially  the  same  entries  originally placed  under 169  and 170; 
        Hurin   son   of   Hador   weds  Morwen   Elfsheen  daughter   of  Baragund 
        son of Beor, and Turin son of Hurin born. The first of these contains 
        two  errors, which  cannot be  other than  the merest  slips in  rapid com- 
        position,  for  son  of  Gumlin son  of Hador  and son  of Bregolas  son of 
        Beor. Similarly in the entry for 172 Huor is called son of Hador.            
   37   Huor son of Hador: an error; see note 36.                                   
   38   Later  addition:  Nirnaith  Irnoth,  changed  to  Nirnairh Dirnoth.  In the 
        Lay of the Children  of Hurin  there are  many different  forms of  the Ei- 
        vish  name  of  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears, one  replacing another: 
        the  last  are  Nirnaith  Unoth  replaced  by  Nirnaith  Ornoth  (the final 
        form Nirnaith Arnediad is also found in the poem, written in, at  a later 
        period, as in Q $11, note 16).                                             
   39   Erydlomin > Erydwethion (later change; cf. notes 11, 27).                   
   40   Flinding  first  >  Findor;  then  Flinding  son of  Fuilin >  Gwindor son 
        of Guilin (later changes).                                                   
   41   Turin was nigh three years old  depends on  the earlier  date of  his birth 
        in the year 170: see note 36.                                               
   42   Later  addition:  Cum-na-Dengin.  The   name  Amon   Dengin  is   found  in 
        a late rewriting of a passage in Q $16, note 3.                             
   43   This  passage  replaced,  at  the  time  of  writing,  the  original:  Rian 
        sought for Huor and died beside his body. See note 46.                      
   44   The  date  173  was  added  subsequently, though.  early, to  this passage. 
        It  remains  in  its  original  place,  not  struck out though  not included 
        here,  at  the   beginning  of   the  next   passage,  Morgoth   broke  his 
        pledges...                                                                  

 

   45    Ulfand early < Ulband, as previously (note 30).                            
   46    The  original  text  had  here:  Tuor  son  of  Huor  was  born  in sorrow, 
         which  was  struck  out at  the time  of writing  when the  additional pas- 
         sage concerning Tuor at the end of annal 172 was written in (note          
         43).  The  sentence  concerning  Nienor  that  follows  was  an  early addi- 
         tion.                                                                      
   47    This  sentence  is  roughly  marked  for  transference  to  between  the an- 
         nals 184 and 184 - 7.                                                      
   48    This  paragraph,  from  Tuor  grew  up...,  was  dated  177,  but   the  date 
         was  struck  out.  As  the  Annals  were first  written, Turin's  birth was 
         placed in the year 170, but this entry was rejected and replaced under     
         165 (note 36). When the present passage was dated 177, therefore,          
         Turin was 7 when he went to  Doriath; but  with the  striking out  of this 
         date the passage belongs under 173, and the years of Turin's life in       
         Hithlum  become  165  -  73,  which  may  or  may not  signify a  change in 


223 

         his age  when he  went to  Doriath. In  The Silmarillion  (p. 198)  he wag 
         eight; but the statement here that he was seven is left unchanged,         
   49    After this annal another  was inserted  in the  later, pencilled  layer of 
         emendation:  188.  Halmir  son  of  Orodreth  trapped and  hung to  a tree 
         by Orcs.                                                                   
   50    Flinding  son  of  Fuilin  >  Gwindor  son  of  Guilin (later  change; cf. 
         note  40).  Flinding  >  Gwindor  at all  occurrences of  the name  in an- 
         nals 190, 190-5, 195.                                                      
   51    Ivrin 's well > the well of Ivrineithil (later change).                    
   57    Mormegil  (Mormakil)  >  Mormael  (Q.   Mormakil)  (later   change).  This 
         is the  first occurrence  of the  form Mormegil;  for earlier  forms see 
         p. 222.                                                                    
   53    Morgoth learns  of the  growing strength  of the  stronghold is  an early' 
         change from Morgoth learns of the stronghold.                              
   54    Erydlomin  >  Erydwethion,  as  previously  (later  change); again  in an- 
         nal 195.                                                                   
   55    Mormakil > Mormael (Mormakil) (later change; cf. note 52).                 
   56    Eldorest > Eglorest (later change; cf. note 8).                            
   57    This  entry,  from  Tuor  was  led  out  of  Hirhlum...,  originally dated 
         196, was changed (early) to 195,  but left  where it  was, with  its date, 
         after that for 195 - 6. A pencilled direction places it in the position is 
         which it is printed here.                                                  
   58    The h of  Turumarth circled  in pencil  for deletion.  The sentence  is an 
         early addition.                                                            
   59    Later  addition:  Silver  Bowl  (Celebrindon).  This  was  struck  out and 
         the  following  substituted:  which  was called  Celebros Silver  Foam but 
         after Nen Girith Shuddering Water.                                         
   60    Nauglafring > Nauglamir (later change); again in annal 202.                
   61    Enmity awakes is an early change from War ensues.                          
   62    Later addition: and the Green-elves (cf. note 34).                         

 

  63 Sarn-Athra > Sarn-Athrad (later change). The same change is made         
     in Q ($14, note 8).                                                   
  64 Rathlorion > Rathloriel (later change). The same change is made in 
     Q ($14, note 11).                                                     
  65 Later addition: Upon Amon Ereb the Lonely Hill in East Beleriand.       
     Above East Beleriand is written in the South.                         
  66 the Gods > the Valar that is the Gods (later change).                 
  67 Eldorest > Eglarest > Eglorest (later changes; cf. notes 8, 56),       
  68 Ingwil > Ingwiel (later change). Ingwiel is the form in an addition to 
     Q (Q II, $17, note 19).                                               
  69 Written hastily in the margin against this paragraph: This great war 
     lasted 50 years.                                                      
  70 perished in > made (later change),                                    
  71 Later addition: but Maidros perished and his Silmaril went into the 
     bosom of the earth, and Maglor cast his into the sea, and wandered 
     for ever on the shores of the world.                                  
                                                                          
              Commentary on the Annals of Beleriand (text AB I).            
                                                                          
    This commentary follows the annal-sections of the text (in             
  some cases groups of annals).                                             
                                                                          
  Opening  section  (before  the   rising  of   the  Sun).   Morgoth  're- 
  builds  his  fortress  of  Angband'.  This  is  as  in  S and  Q, before 
  Utumna   reappeared,   as   it   does   in   the  Ambarkanta   (see  pp. 
  303-4, 306  -  7);  AV  is  not  explicit, mere1y  saying (p.  315) that 
  he   're-established   his   stronghold'.   Angband   is   'beneath  the 
  Black Mountain, Thangorodrim'; on this see pp. 270, 306 - 7.             
    There   is   here   the   remarkable   statement  that   Morgoth  'de- 
  vises  the  Balrogs  and  the  Orcs',  implying  that  it  was  only now 
  that  they  came  into  being.  In  Q  ($2),  following  S,  they origi- 
  nated  (if  the  Balrogs  were  not  already  in  existence) in  the an- 
  cient   darkness   after   the   overthrow  of   the  Lamps,   and  when 
  Morgoth   returned   to   Angband    'countless   became    the   number 
  of  the  hosts  of  his  Orcs   and  demons'   ($4);  similarly   in  AV 
  (p.  315)  he  'bred  and   gathered  once   more  his   evil  servants, 
  Orcs  and  Balrogs'.  A  note  written  against  the  passage  in  Q  $4 
  directs,   however,   that   the   making   of   the   Orcs   should  be 


224 

  brought  in  here  rather  than  earlier  (note 8):  and in  the version 
  of  'The  Silmarillion'  that  followed  Q  (later  than  these  Annals) 
  this was in fact done: when Morgoth returned,                            

 

 countless  became  the  hosts  of  his  beasts  and demons;  and he 
 brought  into  being  the  race  of  the  Orcs,  and they  grew and 
 multiplied in the bowels of the earth.                             
                                                                   
 (The  subsequent  elaboration  of the  origin of  the Orcs  is ex- 
 tremely  complex  and  cannot be  entered into  here.) It  is clear, 
 therefore, that these words in AB I, despite the fact of its being 
 evidently earlier than AV, look  forward to  the later  idea (itself 
 impermanent)   that   the   Orcs   were   not  made   until  after 
 Morgoth's return from Valinor.                                     
 According   to   AV  Morgoth   escaped  in   the  course   of  the 
 Valian  Years 2990  - 1;  some century  and a  half of  later time 
 elapsed, then,  between the  first making  of the  Orcs and  the be- 
 ginning of their raids, referred to  under the  first of  the annals 
 dated 50.                                                          
 On the addition (notes 1 and 4) that Orodreth, Angrod, an          
 Egnor  came  to  Middle-earth  in  the  ships with  the Feanorians 
 while  Felagund  crossed  the  Grinding  Ice  with  Fingolfin, see 
 the commentary on AV, p. 332 - 3.                                  
                                                                   
 Annal 1 The reason for the alteration in note 5 is not clear       
 to me; unless the purpose was to emphasize that the second         
 host of the Noldoli came 'from the North'. i.e. from the Grind- 
 ing Ice, not from Drengist.                                        
                                                                   
 Annals 20 to 51 The 'Feast of Reuniting' is the later name,        
 as in The Silmarillion (p. 113); in Q ($9) it is the 'Feast of     
 Meeting'. But it is still held in the Land of Willows (see         
 p. 210). Now appear at the Feast ambassadors out of Doriath,       
 and Elves from the Western Havens Brithombar and Eldorest          
 (> Eglorest): for the growth of the idea of the Havens             
 p. 281, entry Brithombar. Whereas in Q the Feast took pl           
 within the period of the Siege of Angband, it now preceded         
 laying of the Siege, which in the later story began after          
 Glorious Battle (Dagor Aglareb) - of which the earthquakes         
 and the Orc-raids of the years 50 - 51 are the first suggestio 
 In the second annal dated 50 a major new feature emerges:          
 the story of the dreams and forebodings of Turgon and              
 Felagund, leading to the foundation of Nargothrond and             

 

  Gondolin. (A  later note  in Q  refers to  'the Foreboding  of the 
  Kings',  $9  note  15.) In  Q Nargothrond  was founded  after the 
  escape  of  Felagund  from the  Battle of  Sudden Flame  (p. 128), 
  and  the  hidden  valley  of  Gondolin  was  never   known  until 
  Turgon's  scouts,  in the  flight from  the Battle  of Unnumbered 
  Tears, climbed the heights above the  vale of  Sirion and  saw it 
  beneath them ($15, p. 163; later rewritings to Q alter the story: 
  notes 1 and 2). But in AB I Turgon's  departure with  his people 
  from  Hithlum  to Gondolin  took place  immediately on  his find- 
  ing of the secret valley, whereas in the  later story  he remained 
  still in Vinyamar (of which  there is  as yet  no sign)  for long 
  years after his discovery (The Silmarillion pp. 115, 125 - 6). 
    The  definition  of  Hithlum  as  'the   Land  of   Mist  about 
  Mithrim'  may imply  that Mithrim  was still  only the  name of 
  the Lake; see AV, entry 2995, and commentary p. 330,              
    Fingon  is  now so  named in  the text  as written,  not Finweg 
  > Fingon as in Q.                                                 
    Fingolfin  is  now  named  as  the overlord  of all  the 'Dark- 
  elves' west of Narog,  and his  power is  gathered in  the north- 
  ward  range  of  the  Shadowy  Mountains,  whence he  can watch 
  the  plain  of  Bladorion  (which  is named  in AV,  entry 2996). 
  The  island  on  which  the  tower  of  Felagund  stood   is  now 
  named Tolsirion, and Felagund  is alone  associated with  it (cf, 
  Q $9 'A tower  they [the  sons of  Finrod] had  on an,  island in 
  the river Sirion', but also $10 'Felagund they buried on  the top 


225 

  of his own island  hill'); the  pre-eminence of  Felagund among 
  his brothers is firmly established, and his isolation from them. 
    In Q 49, note 1, the name of the great pineclad  highland be- 
  fore it was turned to a place of evil first  appears, in  the form 
  Taur  Danin;  Taur-na-Danion occurs  in the  list of  Old English 
  names (p. 258). It is said of the sons of Feanor in Q  ($9) that 
  'their watchtower was the high  hill of  Himling, and  their hid- 
  ing place the Gorge of Aglon'.                                    
                                                                   
  Annals 70 to 150  In the  entries giving  the birth-dates  of the 
  Beorians  is  seen  the  emergence  of an  elder line  of descent 
  from  Beor the  Old beside  Barahir and  Beren: Barahir  now has 
  a  brother  Bregolas, whose  sons are  Baragund and  Belegund (in 
  this History all three have been  named in  rewriting of  the Lay 

 

  of Leithian, III. 335, but that belongs to a  much later  time). In 
  this line  Morwen  and  Rian  are  genealogically  placed,   and  as 
  the daughters  of   Baragund  and   Belegund  become   cousins.  But 
  though nothing has  been said  before of  Rian's kindred,  the idea 
  that  Morwen  was  related  to  Beren  goes right  back to  the Tale 
  of  Turambar, where  (as that  text was  first written,  when Beren 
  was a  Man)  Mavwin  was  akin  to Egnor,  Beren's father  (see II. 
  71, 139).                                                           
  The Beorian  house  is  thus  now  in  its final  form in  the last 
  and most  important  generations,   though  Barahir   and  Bregolas 
  were  later  to  be  removed  by  many  steps  from  Beor  with the 
  lengthening  of  the  years  of  Beleriand from  the rising  of the 
                                                                     
  Sun.                                                                
    By  this  genealogical  development,  too,  Turin and  Tuor are 
  descended  both  from  the  house  of  Beor  and  from the  house of 
  Hador;    and    they    become    cousins    on    both    sides. 
  Haleth,  who  in  Q  was  the  son  of  Hador,  now   becomes  inde- 
  pendent, a Father of Men ., cf. the pencilled  alterations to  Q $9 
  (note  11  and  pp.  210 -  11), where  Haleth 'the  Hunter' enters 
  Beleriand shortly before Hador - as is  implied also  in AB  I. The 
  account  of  the  physical  characters  of  the  Men  of  the Three 
  Houses of the Elf-friends is the origin of that in The Silmarillion 
  (p. 148); but at this  stage the  people of  Haleth are  likened to 
  those of Hador rather than to  the Beorians,  and this  is undoubt- 
  edly a reflection of the fact that  the 'Hadorian'  and 'Halethian' 
  houses had only just been divided (see pp. 210 - 11).               
    In Q ($13, p. 155),  Brandir the  Lame was  the son  of Handir, 
  son  of Haleth;  but now  in AB  I a  new generation  is introduced 
  in  the  person  of  Hundor,  by  early addition  to the  text (see 
  note 13).                                                           
    In  the  house  of  Hador the  removal of  Haleth as  Hador's el- 
  der  son  leads to  the appearance  of Gundor,  as seen  already in 
  the later alteration to Q $9 (note 11 and pp.  211 -  12). In  AB I 
  Hador  is  spelt  both  Hador  and  Hador,  and  on  the assumption 
  that  the  accent  must  be  intended whereas  its absence  may not 
  I have extended the form Hador throughout.                          
    The  genealogies  of  the  Three Houses  of the  Elf-friends, to- 
  gether with  their dates  as given  in AB  I (after  revision), are 
  now therefore as shown on p. 377.                                   

 

    That  Hador  became  a  vassal  of  Fingolfin  (annal  120)  is ex- 
  tended  from  the  statement in  Q $9,  'the sons  of Hador  were al- 
  lied  to  the  house  of Fingolfin',  with the  addition that  he was 
  given  lands  in  Hithlum.  That  his grandson  Hurin had  his house 
  in Hithlum is of course an ancient feature of the legends.           
    Beren's  name   Mablosgen,  the   Empty-handed  (note   15)  first 
  appears here (Camlost in The Silmarillion).                         
    The  sadness  of  the  Elves  who  witnessed  it  at  Beor's death 
  'of  weariness'  (annal   150)  foreshadows   the  passage   in  The 
  SilmariL!ion, p. 149.                                                
                                                                      
  Annals  155  to   157  In   these  annals   (to  be   compared  with 
  Q  $9)  are  many  new  details  and  one  major  development.  In a 


226 

  later addition (note 17) the Battle of  Sudden Fire  (itself appear- 
  ing,  as the  Battle of  Sudden Flame,  in a  later addition,  to Q, 
  note   19)   receives   the   Elvish   name  Dagor   Hurbreged;  and 
  Glomund  is  present  at  the  battle  -  by another  later addition 
  (note 18) now in his  'full might'.  At each  stage, in  addition to 
  S, in Q, in. addition to Q, in AB,  and in  addition to AB,  the 
  history  of Glomund  is pushed  further back;  for the  details see 
  pp. 219 - 20. In The Silmarillion p.151 the same pressiov,'i n 
  his  full  might'  is  used  of  Glaurung  at  the Battle  of Sudden 
  Flame, where  the statemeni  !-.as the  point that  at his first ap- 
  pearance (p. 116) he was not yet full-grown: see pp. 405 - 6.        
    The death of Bregolas and the  greater part  of the  warrios of 
  Beor's house is recorded ( f. The  Silmarillion pp.  151 -  2), as 
  aiso  is  the  death of  Hador 'now  aged' and  his son  Gundor, de- 
  fending  Fingolfin  (in  The  Silmarillion   they  fell   at  Eithel 
  Sirion).  Orodreth  as weil  as Felagund  is said  to have  been res- 
  cued  by  Barahir:  this is  not at  all suggested  in Q,  where he 
  came  to  Nargothrod with  Celegorm  and  Curufin  only  'after a 
  time of hreathless flight  and perilous  wanderings*. and  it seems 
  naturai  to  suppose  that  he   had  escaped   from  Taur-ra-Danion 
  (Taur-ra-Fuin)when his brothers Angrod and Egnor were 
  slain. On this matter see further below, annal 157.                
    Whereas in Q Himling  is said  to have  been 'fortified'  by the 
  sons  of  Feanor at  this time  (p. 128.,  previously it  was their 
  'watchtower', p. 125). in  AB it  has been  said earlier  (annal 5l) 

 

          
                                                                   
 that Himling  was  their  'fortress',  and  it  is  now  told that 
 through  the  prowess  of  Maidros  it  was  not  lost to  them. The 
 passage  of  Orcs  through 'the  passes east  of Himling'  into East 
 Beleriand,  and  the  scattering  of   'the  Gnomes   of  Feanor*s 
 house,  are  now  first  mentioned: in  The Silmarillion  (p. 153) 
 this     is                much                amplified. 
 Much   the   most   important   and  interesting   development  in 
 these annals  is  the  sojourn  of  Hurin  in  Gondolin,  of which 
 there has been  no hint  hitherto; but  there are  many differences 
 from the  story  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  158).  In  AB  it was 
 Haleth and  his  fosterling  Hurin  (a boy  of fourteen)  who were 
 brought to  Gondolin,  having  been  found  by  some  of  Turgon's 
 people in the vale of Sirion; and  it is  suggested that  this was 
 done   because   Turgon   had   been   warned  by   messages  from 
 Ulmo that  'the  help  of  Men was  necessary for  him' -  this be- 
 ing  an  element in  Ulmo's message  to Turgon  by the  mouth of 
 Tuor  at a  much later  time in  Q: 'without  Men the  Elves shall 
 not  prevail  against  the Orcs  and Balrogs'  (pp. 170,  176). In 
 this  earliest  version  of  the  story  Haleth  and   Hurin  left 
 Gondolin  because of  the tidings  of the  Battle of  Sudden Fire. 
 In  the later  legend, on  the other  hand, it  was Hurin  and his 
 brother  Huor  who  were  brought  (by  the  Eagles)  to Gondolin, 
 and this happened during the battle itself; they left the city be- 
 cause  they  desired  to  return  to the  world outside,  and they 
 were  permitted  to  go (despite  Maeglin) because  having been 
 brought by the  Eagles, they  did not  know the  way. This  was an 
 important  element  in  the  later  story,  since Hurin  could not 
 reveal  the  secret  of  Gondolin  whether  he  would  or  no. The 
 messages  and  dreams  sent  by  Ulmo,  which  caused   Turgon  to 
 receive  Hurin  and  Huor  well when  he found  them in  his city, 
 counselled  him expressly  'to deal  kindly with  the sons  of the 
 house  of  Hador,  from  whom help  should come  to him  at need'. 
 Of course  the essential  element of  Turgon's leaving  arms at 
 Vinyamar  on  Ulmo's  command  was  not  yet  present.  The  story 
 in  AB has  however the  liking of  Turgon for  Hurin and  his de- 
 sire to keep him in Gondolin, the  oath of  secrecy, and  the fos- 
 tering  of   Hurin   among   the  people   of  Haleth   (with  whom, 
 however, the 'Hadorians' were not yet allied  by intermarriage). 
 Now  too  appears  Turgon's  sending  of  messages  to Sirion's 

 

  mouths and the building of ships for vain embassage to Valinor 


227 

  (The Silmarillion p. 159).                                       
    The annal 157 introduces the interval of two years between 
  the Battle of Sudden Fire and the taking of Tolsirion, which 
  thenceforward was the Isle of Werewolves (and by the later ad 
  dition given in note 20 receives the Elvish name Tol-na-         
  Gaurhoth); cf. The Silmarillion p. 155. But in this annal it is 
  said that not only Orodreth and Celegorm and Curufin re-         
  treated to Nargothrond at this time, but Felagund also, and that 
  they made there a great hidden palace. It is difficult to know 
  what to make of this, since in the entry for the year 50 it is 
  said that Felagund 'established his armouries' in the caves of 
  Narog, and in that for 51 'he has his seat beside Narog in the 
  South' (though his power is centred on Tolsirion). Possibly the 
  meaning is that though Nargothrond had existed for more than 
  a hundred years as a Gnomish stronghold it was not until the 
  Battle of Sudden Fire that it was made into a great subterra- 
  nean dwelling or 'palace', and the centre of Felagund's power. 
  Even so, the story still seems very confused. In annal 155       
  'Barahir and his chosen champions saved Felagund and             
  Orodreth', but also 'Celegorm and Curufin were defeated and      
  fled with Orodreth', while two years later, in 157, 'Felagund 
  and Orodreth, together with Celegorm and Curufin, retreated to 
  Nargothrond'.                                                    
    The implication of the last two of these statements is surely 
  that Celegorm and Curufin fled west with Orodreth after Taur- 
  na-Danion was overrun and took refuge with Felagund on           
  Tolsirion; and when Tolsirion was taken two years later all      
  four went south to Narog. If this is so, it seems to contradict 
  the first statement, that Barahir saved Felagund and Orodreth 
  at the Battle of Sudden Fire in 155. Perhaps the fact that the 
  annal heading 155 is written twice hints at an explanation. The 
  second heading is written at the top of a manuscript page        
  <which finishes at the end of the entry for 157); and it may be 
  that this page is a revision which was not properly integrated 
  into the narrative.                                              
    In the second paragraph of 157 various new elements ap-        
  pear: the sending of Morwen and Rian to Hithlum (cf. The         
  Silmarillion p. 155); Morwen's name Eledwen (note 24; she is 

 

                                                            
                                                                  
 called  'Elfsheen'  in  Q  $9 and  in annal  145); the  presence of 
 Baragund  and  Belegund  in  Barahir's band,  and (by  later addi- 
 tion, note 23) the  names of  two others  (in addition  to Gorlim): 
 Radros   and   Dengar   (>  Dagnir).   Dagnir  remains   in  The 
 Silmarillion; Radros became Radhruin.                             
                                                                  
 It  may  be  noticed  here  that  while  my  father  subsequently 
 greatly  expanded  the duration  of Beleriand  from the  rising of 
 the  Sun to  the end  of the  Elder Days,  this expansion  was not 
 achieved  by a  general, proportionate  enlargement of  the inter- 
 vals between major  events. Rather,  he increased  (in successive 
 versions of the Annals) the lapse of time in the earlier  part of 
 the  period,  the  Siege  of  Angband  being  enormously extended; 
 and the relative dating of the later  events remained  little af- 
 fected. Thus in AB I  the Battle  of Sudden  Fire took  place in 
 the year 155, the attack on the fortress of Sirion's Well in 162, 
 and  the  Fall  of  Nargothrond  in 195;  in The  Silmarillion the 
 dates are 455 (p. 150), 462 (p. 160), and 495 (p. 211).            
                                                                  
 Annal  162  The  renewed  assault  of  Morgoth seven  years after 
 the Battle of Sudden Fire, and  the death  of Gumlin  at Sirion's 
 Well, are referred to in  The Silmarillion,  p. 160  (with Galdor 
 for Gumlin). Sirion's Well is referred to in the Lay of the Chil- 
 dren of Hurin (line 1460)  and marked  on the  map (p.  222): but 
 'in the west of (the Shadowy  Mountains)' in  this annal  must be 
 a slip for 'east'. The Elvish name Eithyl  Sirion (note  26) here 
 first occurs.                                                   
   Hurin was 'summoned to Hithlum', clearly, because he was        


228 

 at that time still with his fosterfather Haleth in the vale of 
 Sirion.                                                           
                                                                  
 Annal   163   The   Swarthy   Men   were  referred   to  somewhat 
 obliquely in Q $11, as first written: 'Men  from East  and South' 
 came  to  Maidros'  banner  (p.  141), and  'the swart  Men, whom 
 Uldor the Accursed  led, went  over to  the foe'  (p. 142).  In a 
 later  interpolation  (note  14) the  Men from  the East  are 'the 
 swarthy  Men' and  'the Easterlings',  and 'the  sons of  Bor and 
 Ulfang'  are referred  to, Uldor  the Accursed  being the  son of 
 Ulfang. It is not  made clear  in Q  when these  Men came  out of 

 

  the  East.  In  AB  they  entered  Beleriand  in  the   year  following 
  the  attack  on  Eithel Sirion,  while in  The Silmarillion  their com- 
  ing  is  put  somewhat  earlier  (p.  157);  but  the   description  of 
  them  in  AB  is  preserved  closely  in  The  Silmarillion,  with  the 
  mention   of   their   liking   (clearly  boding   no  good)   for  the 
  Dwarves  of  the  mountains.  The  interpolation  in  Q  has  the final 
  form  Ulfang,  whereas  in  AB  he  is  Ulfand  (<  Ulband,  notes  30, 
  45);*  his  sons  are  Uldor,  Ulfast,  whose  names  were  not  after- 
  wards   changed,   and   Ulwar,   who   became  Ulwarth.   The  associ- 
  ation  of  Cranthir  (Caranthir)  with  these  Men  also  now  appears. 
  With   the   words   of   AB   concerning  the   Dwarves  cf.   Q  $9, 
  p. 126.                                                                 
                                                                         
  Annal   163-4   On   the   Green-elves   of  Ossiriand,   appearing  in 
  a  later  interpolation  (note  34, and  again subsequently,  note 62), 
  see AV note 14, and p. 329.                                             
                                                                         
  Annal   165-70   There   is   some   slight   difference  in   the  ac- 
  counts  in  Q  $11  and  in  AB:  thus  the  deeds  of   Celegorm  and 
  Curufin  are  here  made  the  reason  for  Thingol's  refusal  to join 
  the   Union  of   Maidros,  and   the  reluctance   of  the   Elves  of 
  Nargothrond  is  due  to  their  strategy   of  stealth   and  secrecy, 
  whereas  in Q  (as in  The Silmarillion,  pp. 188  - 9)  Thingol's mo- 
  tive  is  the  demand  made  on  him  by  the  Feanorians for  the re- 
  turn  of  the  Silmaril,  and  it   is  the   deeds  of   Celegorm  and 
  Curufin  that  determine  Orodreth's  policy.   There  is   possibly  a 
  suggestion  in  the  words  'for  his  people  will not  be restrained' 
  that   the   emergence   of   the   host   of   Gondolin   was  against 
  Turgon's  wisdom;  in  Q  $11  as  rewritten  (in  note  7,  where the 
  story  of  the  much  earlier  foundation  of  Gondolin   had  entered) 
  Turgon 'deemed that the hour of deliverance was at hand'.               
                                                                         
  Annal   168    'The   Orcs    are   slowly    driven   back    out   of 
  Beleriand':  cf.  the  rewritten  passage  in  Q  $11,  note  14,  'Now 
  for  a  while  the  Gnomes  had  victory,  and  the  Orcs  were  driven 
  out  of  Beleriand.'  But  this  comes after  'Having gathered  at last 
                                                                         
  (*My father doubtless had both Q and AB in front of him as working texts 
  for a considerable time, and some emendations to Q are later  than some 
  emendations to AB.)                                                      

 

  
                                                                     
 all the strength  that  he  might  Maidros  appointed  a  day'.  as I 
 noted  (p.  216),  the  two  phases  of  the  war  are  not  clearly 
 distinguished  - or  else it  is only  with the  Annals that  the first 
 successes  against  the  Orcs  are  moved  back,  with   the  concom- 
 itant idea that Maidros 'made trial  of his  strength too  soon, ere 
 his plans were full-wrought' (The Silmarillion p. 189),               
                                                                     
 Annal 171  In  Q  $15  Isfin  was  lost  after  the  Battle  of  Un- 
 numbered  Tears,  and  Eol  'had  deserted  the  hosts ere  the bat- 
 tle'.                                                                 
                                                                     
 Annal   172   In   this   account   of   the  Battle   of  Unnumbered 
 Tears,  with  which  is  to  be  compared  that in  Q $11,  the Annals 
 introduce  many  new  details  that  were  to  endure.  Thus it  is now 


229 

 told that  Huor  wedded  Rian  on  the  eve  of  battle'; and that 
 there  was to  be a  visible signal  from Maidros  to the  hosts wait- 
 ing  in  the  West.  The  doubt  concerning  the part of  the people 
 of Haleth  (see  p.  218)  is  now  resolved,  and  'Hundor  son of 
 Haleth  and  the  Men  of  the  wood  were  slain  in   the  retreat 
 across  the  sands',  and  'glad  meeting of  Hurin and  Turgon' now 
 arises  out  of the  story first  told in  annal 155;  Balrogs smote 
 down  Fingon,  though  Gothmog  is  not  yet  named  as  his slayer; 
 Turgon  took  with him  in his  retreat a  remnant of  Fingon's host 
 (so  in  The  Silmarillion  p. 194);  Huor died  of a  venomed arrow 
 (ibid); Hurin threw away his shield (ibid. p. 195).                  
    The  change  of  Flinding  son  of  Fuilin  to  Gwindor   son  of 
 Guilin  (note  40),  which  is made  also in  Q, clearly  occurs for 
 the  first  time  in AB,  since Flinding  here became  Findor before 
 he became Gwindor.                                                   
    In  a  few  points  AB  differs  from  the  later   story.  Here, 
 Tugon's  host  descended  out  of  Taur-na-Fuin,  whereas  in  Q (as 
 rewritten,  note  7)  'they encamped  before the  West Pass  in sight 
 of  the  walls of  Hithlum', just  as in  The Silrmrillion  (p. 192) 
 the  host  of  Gondolin  'had  been  stationed   southward  guarding 
 the Pass of  Sirion'. The  loyalty of  Bor and  his sons,  not men- 
 tioned  in  Q,  now  appears,   but  whereas   in  the   later  story 
 Maglor   slew  Uldor,   and  the   sons  of   Bor  slew   Ulfast  and 
 Ulwarth  'ere  they  themselves  were  slain',  in  AB  Cranthir slew 

 

  Uldor,  and  Ulfast and  Ulwar slew  Bor and  his three  sons. The 
  number  of  a  thousand  Balrogs  who  came  from   Angband  when 
  'Hell  was  emptied'  shows  once  again  (see II.  212 -  13 and 
  p. 207), and  more clearly  than ever,  that Morgoth's  demons of 
  fire were not conceived as rare or  peculiarly terrible  - unlike 
  the Dragon.                                                       
    The  passage  at  the  end  of  annal  172  concerning  Rian and 
  Tuor, with the further reference  to Tuor  in annal  173, follows 
  the rewriting of Q $16, note  3; and  here as  there there  is no 
  mention  of  Tuor's  slavery  among  the  Easterlings,  which was 
  however referred to in Q as first written.                       
                                                                   
  Annal 173 The words 'others [Morgoth] forbade to leave            
  Hithlum, and they were slain if Orcs found them east or south 
  of the Shadowy Mountains' must refer to those Elves who           
  were not enslaved in Angband; but this is surprising. Cf. Q       
  $12, where it is told that Morgoth penned the Easterlings be- 
  hind the Shadowy Mountains in Hithlum 'and slew them if           
  they wandered to Broseliand or beyond', similarly in The          
  Silmarillion (p. 195) it was the Easterlings that Morgoth would 
  not permit to leave.                                              
    In Q $12, as in S, and as in The Silmarillion (pp. 198 - 9),    
  Turin left his home before his sister Nienor was born (see        
  p. 70). The entry in AB for Nienor's birth is an early addition 
  and certainly belongs with the revised dating of Turin's birth    
  (i.e. in the year 165, not 170, see note 36) and of his journey 
  to Doriath (i.e. in 173 not 177, see note 48): thus Turin left af- 
  ter his sister's birth.                                           
                                                                   
  Annals  181  to  199  In  the  legend  of  the  Children of Hurin 
  there  is virtually  no development  from its  form in  the Quenta, 
  from  which  the  Annals  doubtless  derive  it direct.  The compres- 
  sion  is  very  great,  and  AB  was  obviously  not  intended as an 
  independent  composition  -  thus   Turin's  slaying   of  Brodda is 
  recorded  in  the  annal  195  -  6  without  any  indication  of the 
  cause,  and  Brodda  has  not  even  been  mentioned.   The  passage 
  in  the  entry  for  196:  'Glomund  lays  a  spell  on  the company 
  and disperses it. Morwen vanishes in the woods; and a great       

 

                                                            
                                                                  
 darkness  of  mind  comes  on  Nienor'  is  hardly  recognisable  as 
 an account  of  the events  known from  the Tale,  S, Q,  and The 
 Silmarillion; but the general concurrence of all these  other ver- 


230 

 sions  shows  that  the  wording of  AB is  the result  of severe 
 compression  of  the  narrative,  composed  very   rapidly  (see 
 p, 351). It is here, however,  that the  only development  in the 
 story appears: Morwen 'vanishes in the woods', and is not, as 
   Q $13, led back in safety to Doriath.                           
   The dates in these annals  are of  much interest  as indicating 
 my father's conception of the duration and  intervals of  time in 
 the legend, concerning which the other early texts give  very lit- 
 tle idea. Thus Turin's  life as  an outlaw  after his  flight from 
 Doriath and until the capture  of Beleg  lasted three  years, and 
 a further two until the band  was betrayed  by Blodrin;  he spent 
 five years in Nargothrond, and was thirty years  old at  the time 
 of  its  fall.  Nienor  dwelt  among the  Woodmen for  some three 
 years;  she was  twenty-six years  old when  she died,  and Turin 
 Turambar was thirty-four.                                         
                                                                  
 Annal 181  The first  sentence of  this annal  refers to  the time 
 when tidings of  Morwen ceased  - seven  years after  Turin's ar- 
 rival in Doriath according to the Tale of  Turambar (II.  90) and 
 the first version of the Lay of the Children of Hurin  (line 333), 
 nine according to the second version  of the  Lay (line  693) and 
 in The Silmarillion (p. 199). In AB it is  eight years  since his 
 Coming to Doriath.                                                
                                                                  
 Annal  184  Turin,  born  in  165,  was  thus  nineteen  when he 
 slew  Orgof,  as  in the  Tale of  Turambar and  the Lay  of the 
 Children of Hurin; see II. 142.                                   
                                                                  
 Annal  188  In  the  entry for  this year  added later  in pencil 
 (note 49) the story of the  slaying of  Orodreth's son  Halmir by 
 Orcs  re-emerges from  the Lay  of the  Children of  Hurin, lines 
 2137 - 8, where Orodreth's hatred for 'the broods of Hell' is ex- 
 plained:                                                           
                                                                  
          his son had they slain, the swift-footed                 
          Halmir the hunter of hart and boar,                      

 

  This  disappeared again  later, and  the name  Halmir came  to be 
  borne by one of the Lords of  Brethil, when  that line  was much 
  changed and extended. (In the list of Old English names  of the 
  Noldorin princes  (p. 261)  Orodreth has  two sons,  Ordhelm and 
  Ordlaf, without Elvish equivalents given.)                       
                                                                  
  Annal  190  The added  Elvish name  Ivrineithil (note  51) first 
  occurs here (Eithel Ivrin in The Silmarillion).                  
    'They are admitted on the prayer of  Finduilas' is  a reminis- 
  cence of the Lay (lines 1950ff.).                                
                                                                  
  Annal  190-195  In  this annal  is the  first occurrence  of the 
  form  Mormegil  (Mormaglir  in Q),  though here  corrected later 
  (notes 52, 55) to Mormael.                                       
    The  early  emendation  given  in  note  53  is  curious: from 
  'Morgoth learns  of the  stronghold' to  'Morgoth learns  of the 
  growing strength of the stronghold'. It looks as if  this change 
  was made in order to get rid of the  idea that  the loss  of the 
  'ancient secrecy' of the  Elves of  Nargothrond in  Turin's time 
  led to Morgoth's discovery of its site. I have  said in  my com- 
  mentary on  Q $13  (p. 222)  that while  there is  no suggestion 
  that  Turin's  policy  of  open  war  revealed   Nargothrond  to 
  Morgoth. this element  goes back  to the  Tale !>f  Turambar and 
  its absence  from Q  must be  due to  compression (earlier  in Q, 
  at the end of $11, it is said that after the Battle of Unnumbered 
  Tears Morgoth paid little heed to Doriath and Nargothrond        
  'maybe because he knew little of them').  In The  Silmarillion it 
  is said  (p. 211)  'Thus Nargothrond  v as  revealed to  the wrath 
  and  hatred of  Morgoth'. and  this is  an important  element in 
  contention  over  policy  between  Turin  and  Gwindor  in  a late 
  passage that was not fully assimilated  to the Narn  i Hin  Hurin 
  (Unfinished Tales p. 156):                                        


231 

                                                                  
    You  speak  of  secrecy,  and  say  that  therein  lies  the only 
    hope;   but   could   you   ambush   and   waylay   every  scout and 
    spy  of Morgoth  to the  last and  least, so  that none  came ever 
    hack  with  tidings  to  Angband,  yet,'rom  that  he  would  learn 
    that you lived and guess where.                                

 

  
                                                                     
   The  alliance  of  the  Gnomes  of  Nargothrond  with  the people 
 of Handir  (Haleth's  grandson)  is not  found in  The Silmarillion. 
 In AB (annal 195)  Handir was  slain in  the battle  of the  fall of 
 Nargothrond:  in  The  Silmarillion  (p.  212)  he  was slain  in the 
 year of the fall, but before it, when Orcs invaded his land.         
                                                                     
 Annal 192 Cf, the beginning of Q $16, and note 1.                   
                                                                     
 Annal 195 'Glomund with a host of Orcs comes over 
 Erydlomin (> Erydwethion, note 54) and defeats the Gnomes 
 between Narog and Taiglin' shows that, as in Q, the battle be- 
 fore the Sack of Nargothrond was not fought at the later site, 
 between Ginglith and Narog; see p. 222. 
   That Glomund passed over the Shadowy Mountains implies 
 that he came from Angband by way of Hithlum, and it seems 
 strange that he should not have entered Beleriand by the Pass 
 of Sirion; but in the next major version of the Annals of 
 Beleriand it is said expressly that he 'passed into Hithlum and 
 did great evil' before moving south over the mountains. There 
 is no indication of why Morgoth commanded, or permitted, 
 this. 
  In the redating of the entry (196 > 195, see note 57) con- 
 cerning Tuor's journey from. Hithlum to the sea and along the 
 coast to the mouths of Sirion there is a foreshadowing of the 
 situation in The Silmarillion, where (p. 238) 'Tuor dwelt in 
 Nevrast alone, and the summer of that year passed, and the 
 doom of Nargothrond drew near', thus it was that Tuor and 
 Voronwe on their journey to Gondolin saw at Ivrin, defiled by 
 the passage of Giaurung on his way to Nargothrond, a tall man 
 hastening northwards and bearing a black sword, though 'they 
 knew not who he was. nor anything of what had befallen in the 
 south' (p, 239). 
   Why were the havens of Brithombar and Eidorest (> Eglo- 
 rest) 'ruined'? Nothirgh has been said anywhere of the destruc- 
 tion of the Havens. In the next version of the Annals of 
 Beleriand the same remains true, and the Havens are again 
 said, in the corresponding passage, to be in ruins. Later, the 
 Havens were besieged and destroyed in the year after the Bat- 
 tle of Unnumbered Tears (The Silmarillion p. 296), and I have 

 

  suggested (p.  282) that  the statement  on the  Westward exten- 
  sion  of the  first map  'Here Morgoth  reaches the  shores' may 
  be a reference to this story: it seems then that it  was present, 
  though my father neglected to refer to it until much later.      
                                                                  
  Annal  195-6  If  the  h of  Turumarth was  to be  deleted (note 
  58) this was a reversion  of the  form in  the Tale  of Turambar 
  (II.  70,  86).  In  Q  $13  Turumarth  was  later   changed  to 
  Turamarth (note 12).                                             
                                                                  
  Annal  199  The  addition  Silver  Bowl (Celebrindon)  (note 59) 
  is another case, like that of Flinding > Gwindor in  annal 172,: 
  where the  alteration to  AB preceded  that made  to Q.  This is 
  shown by the first,  rejected form  Celebrindon, whereas  in the 
  addition to Q ($13, note 14) there is only Celebros (translated, 
  as here, 'Foam-silver').                                         
    Tuor entered Gondolin in 196, and thus  dwelt there  for three 
  years  before  he  wedded Idril.  This agrees  with S  ($16, see 
  p. 80); in Q nothing is said on the subject.                     
                                                                  


232 

  Annal  200  Hurin's  band  is  now  composed  of  Men,  not Elves: 
  (see II. 137: in Q  $14 they  are only  described as  'outlaws of 
  the wood-'); but the story as very briefly  given in  AB does not 
  advance matters  at this  difficult point  (see my  discussion, p. 
  227).  Hurin's  fate.  and  Morwen's,  is  now  unknown;   in  Q 
  'some have  said that  he cast  himself at  last into  the western 
  sea',  and  (at the  end of  $13) 'some  have said  that Morwen, 
  wandering  woefully  from  Thingol's  halls...  came  on   a  time 
  to that stone and read it, and there died'.                      
                                                                  
  Annals   201   and   202   In   the   story  of   the  Nauglafring 
  (> Nauglamir, note 60) there is  very little  narrative develop- 
  ment  from  Q  ($14); but  the change  from 'War  ensues between 
  the  Elves  and  Dwarves'  to  'Enmity  awakes' (note  61) suggests 
  that my  father was  revising the  story at  this point.  The war' 
  is  the  fighting  in  the  Thousand  Caves  which first  enters the 
  narrative in Q, and of which the slain  were buried  in Cum-nan- 
  Arasaith, the Mound of Avarice.                                  
    The  name  of  the  river  in  which  the  gold   was  drowned, 

 

                                                                
                                                                       
 Asgar,  is  found  also in  the list  of Old  English names  (p. 256); 
 in  Q,  and  on  the  Eastward  extension  of  the  map,  as   in  The 
 Silmarillion,      the           form           is           Ascar. 
 It   is   made   clear   that   Luthien   died   as   a   mortal  (see 
 pp.230  -  1),  and  the  suggestion  is  that she  and Beren  died at 
 the same  time. It  is seen  from the  dates that  they lived  on only 
 a very  brief while  after the  coming of  the Silmaril  to Ossiriand: 
 cf. Q 'the  brief hour  of the  loveliness of  the land  of Rathlorion 
 departed'.  Here  is  first  mentioned  the  bringing  of  the  Silmaril 
 to Dior in Doriath by night.                                           
                                                                       
 Annal 206  A  minor  addition  to  the  story  in  Q  ($14)   is  that 
 the battle  between  the  Elves  of  the   renewed  Doriath   and  the 
 Feanorians  took  place  on  the  eastern  marches  of the  realm; and 
 the  young   sons   of   Dior  were   slain  'by   the  evil   men  of 
 Maidros   host   -   which   does  not   necessarily  mean   that  the 
 Feanorians  came  upon  Doriath  with   mortal  allies,   since  'men' 
 is  used  in  the  sense  'male  Elves'.  The  sons  of   Dior,  named 
 Eldun  and  Elrun  in  an  addition  to  Q  (note  14), here  bear the 
 names  Elboron  and  Elbereth;  the  latter must  be the  first occur- 
 rence  of  Elbereth  in  my  father's  writings. It  is seen  from the 
 next  version  of  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  that  the  names  Eldun 
 and Elrun replaced those given here.                                   
                                                                       
 Annal 207 As with the legend of the Necklace of the                    
 Dwarves, the extremely abbreviated account of the Fall of              
 Gondolin in AB shows no change from that in Q $16.                     
                                                                       
 Annals  208  to  233  In  annal  210  it  is  said that  Maidros actu- 
 ally  forswore  his  oath  (although  in  the  final  annal  he  still 
 strives to fulfil it); and this is clearly to be related to his revul- 
 sion  at  the  killing of  Dior's sons  in the  annal for  206. Damrod 
 and  Diriel  now  emerge  as  the  most  ferocious  of  the  surviving 
 sons of  Feanor, and  it is  on them  that the  blame for  the assault 
 on  the  people  of  Sirion  is  primarily  laid:  Maidros  and Maglor 
 only  'gave  reluctant  aid'.  This  develops  further  an  increasing 
 emphasis  in  these  texts  on  the  weariness  and  loathing  felt by 
 Maidros and Maglor for the duty they felt bound to.                    
   In  annal  229  Maglor,  rather  than  Maidros  as  in  Q  $17,  be- 

 

  comes the saviour of Elrond; this change is made also in a late 
  rewriting  of  Q  II  ($17  note  10),  where  however  Elrond'g 
  brother Elros also emerges, as is not the case in AB.            
    The  story  of  Elwing  and  Earendel  follows  that  in  Q II: 
  Elwing bearing the Silmaril is borne up out of  the sea  by Ulmo 
  in the form of a bird  and comes  to Earendel  as he  returns in 
  his ship, and they voyage together in search of Valinor;  and it 


233 

  is Earendel's 'embassy of the  two kindreds'  that leads  to the 
  assault on Morgoth (see p. 238).                                 
                                                                  
  Annal 240 This is the first mention of any kind  of the  life of 
  the few surviving Gnomes  who remained  free after  the destruc- 
  tion of the people of Sirion; and in a later addition  {note 65) 
  is the first appearance of Amon  Ereb, the  Lonely Hill  in East 
  Beleriand, where they lurked.                                    
                                                                  
  Annal 233 - 43 The refusal of the Teleri to leave Valinor at all 
  (though they built a great number of  ships) seems  to be  a re- 
  version to the story in Q I $17 (p. 178); in Q II (p. 185) 'they 
  went not forth save  very few',  and those  that did  manned the 
  fleet that bore the hosts of Valinor.  But AB  may here  be sim- 
  ply very compressed.                                             
                                                                  
  Annals  247  and  250  In   the  account   of  the   assault  on 
  Morgoth from the West there are some additions to the narra- 
  tive in Q ($17): the Battle  of Eldorest  (> Eglorest),  where 
  Ingwil (> Ingwiel) landed in Middle-earth (Ingwiel is  the form 
  in an addition to Q II, note 19: the form Ingwil in AB  preceded 
  this),  the  summons  of  Fionwe  to  all  Elves,  Dwarves, Men, 
  beasts and birds to come  to his  banners, and  the array  of the 
  hosts of West and North on either side of Sirion.                
    The statement (subsequently corrected, notes 70  - 1)  that both 
  Maglor and Maidros 'perished in a last endeavour to seize the    
  Silmarils'  seems  to suggest  a passing  movement to  yet another 
  formulation of the story (see the table on p.  246); but  may well 
  have been a slip due to hasty composition and compression.       
    It remains to notice the chronology of the last years of       
  Beleriand that now emerges. Tuor wedded Idril in the year        
  (199) of the deaths of Turin and Nienor; and both Earendel      

 

  
                                                                   
 and  Elwing  were  born in  the following  year, five  years after 
 the  Fall  of  Nargothrond  (195).  Dior's  re-establishment  of 
 Thingol's  realm  lasted  no  more  than  four  years  (202-6), and 
 the Fall of Gondolin followed only  one year  after the  final ruin 
 of Doriath (in the old Tale of  the Nauglafring,  II. 242, the two 
 events took place on the very same  day), and  one year  after the 
 capture of Meglin in the hills.  Earendel was  seven years  old at 
 the Fall of Gondolin (as stated in Q  $16), and  thirty-three years 
 old  when  he  came  to Valinor.  The settlement  at the  delta of 
 Sirion lasted twenty-three years from Elwing's coming there.        
   The  shortness  of the  time as  my father  at this  period con- 
 ceived  it  is  very remarkable,  the more  so in  comparison with 
 the later lavish millennia  of the  Second and  Third Ages,  not to 
 mention the aeons allowed to the  ages before  the rising  of the 
 Sun  and  Moon.  The  history  of  Men  in Beleriand  is comprised 
 in  150  years  before   the  beginning   of  the   Great  Battle; 
 Nargothrond,  Doriath,  and  Gondolin  were  all  destroyed within 
 thirteen years; and the entire history from the rising of  the Sun 
 and Moon  and the  coming of  the exiled  Noldoli to  the destruc- 
 tion of Beleriand and the  end of  the Elder  Days covers  two and 
 half centuries (or three according to the  addition given  in note 
 69: 'This great war lasted fifty years').                          
                                                                   
      The second version of the earliest Annals of Beleriand.      
                                                                   
   This brief text, 'AB II', is in the  first annals  closely based 
 on  AB  I,  with  some  minor  developments,  but  from  the entry 
 for the year  51 becomes  a new;  work, and  an important  step in 
 the  evolution  of  the  legendary history.  The text  was lightly 
 emended  in  pencil,  and  these  few  changes  are  given  in the 
 notes,  apart  from  one or  two small  alterations of  wording or 
 sentence-order that are taken up silently. As to its date, it v as 
 later than AV if one  judges from  the fact  that the  crossing to 
 Middle-earth  of  Orodreth, Angrod,  and Egnor  in the  ships with 


234 

 the Feanorians is embodied in  the text,  whereas in  AV it  is an 
 insertion (note 21)                                               

 

              ANNALS OF BELERIAND.                                 
                                                                  
              Translation of AElfwine.                             
                                                                  
 Before  the  Uprising  of  the  Sun  Morgoth  fled   from  Valinor 
 with the Silmarils  the magic  gems of  Feanor, and  returned into 
 the  Northern  regions  and  rebuilt  his  fortress of  Angband be- 
 neath   the   Black   Mountains,  where   is  their   highest  peak 
 Thangorodrim.  He  devised  the  Balrogs  and  the  Orcs;  and  he 
 set the Silmarils in his iron crown.                              
  The  Gnomes  of   the  eldest   house,  the   Dispossessed,  came 
 into  the  North  under  Feanor  and  his  seven sons,  with their 
 friends  Orodreth,  Angrod,  and  Egnor,  sons  of   Finrod.  They 
 burned the Telerian ships. They fought soon  after the  First Bat- 
 tle with Morgoth, that is Dagor-os-Giliath, or  the 'Battle-under- 
 Stars',   and  Feanor   defeated  the   Orcs,  but   was  mortally 
 wounded  by  Gothmog,  captain  of  Balrogs,  and  died  after  in 
 Mithrim.                                                          
  Maidros,   his  eldest   son,  was   ambushed  and   captured  by 
 Morgoth,  and  hung  on  Thangorodrim;  but  the  other   sons  of 
 Feanor  camped  about  Lake   Mithrim  behind   Eredwethion,  that 
 is the 'Shadowy Mountains'.                                       
                                                                  
         Years of the Sun                                          
         1 Here the Moon and Sun, made  by the  Gods after         
         the death of the Two Trees of Valinor,  first ap-         
         peared. Thus measured time  came into  the Hither         
         Lands.'  Fingolfin  (and  with him  came Felagund         
         son  of  Finrod)  led  the  second  house  of the         
         Gnomes  over  the  straits  of Grinding  Ice into         
         the Hither Lands.  They came  into the  North even        
         with the first Moonrise, and the first dawn shone         
         upon  their  march  and  their  unfurled banners.         
         And  Morgoth  at  the  coming  of  Light withdrew         
         dismayed into his deepest  dungeons, but  there he        
         smithied in secret, and sent forth  black smokes.         
         But  Fingolfin  blew his  trumpets in  defiance be-       
         fore the gates of Angband, and came south to              
         Mithrim; but the sons of Feanor withdrew to its           

 

                                                    
                                                          
         south  shores,  and there  was feud  between the 
         houses, because of the burning of the ships, and 
         the lake lay between them.                        
                                                          
    2    Here Fingon son of Fingolfin healed the feud, by 
         rescuing  Maidros  with  the  help  of Thorndor, 
         king of Eagles.                                   
                                                          
 1-50    Here  the  Gnomes  wandered  far  and  wide over 
         Beleriand exploring it, and settling it  in many 
         places,  from  the  Great  Sea, Belegar,  to the 
         Eredlindon, that is the 'Blue Mountains', and all 
         Sirion's vale, save Doriath in the middle, which 
         Thingol and Melian held.                          
                                                          
   20    Here the 'Feast and Games of Reuniting' (that is 
         in  Gnomish  Mereth Aderthad)  were held  in Nan 
         Tathrin, the 'Land of Willows', near the delta of 
         Sirion, and there were the Elves of  Valinor, of 
         the three houses  of the  Gnomes, and  the Dark- 
         elves,  both  those   of  the   Western  Havens, 
         Brithombar  and  Eglorest,'  and  the  scattered 
         Wood-elves  of  the  West,  and  ambassadors  of 
         Thingol. But  Thingol would  not open  his king- 


235 

         dom,  or remove  the magic  that fenced  it, and 
         trusted not in the restraint of Morgoth  to last 
         long. Yet a time of peace,  of growth  and blos- 
         soming, and of prosperous mirth followed.         
                                                          
     50  Here  unquiet  and  troubled  dreams  came  upon 
         Turgon  son  of  Fingolfin  and   Felagund,  his 
         friend, son of Finrod, and they sought for places 
         of refuge,  lest Morgoth  burst from  Angband as 
         their dreams foreboded.  And Felagund  found the 
         caves of Narog  and began  there to  establish a 
         strong place and armouries, after the fashion of 
         Thingol's abode at Menegroth;  and he  called it 
         Nargothrond.  But  Turgon journeying  alone dis- 

 

 covered by the grace of Ulmo the hidden vale of 
 Gondolin, and he told no man as yet.               
                                                   
 51  Now  Morgoth's  might  began suddenly  to  move 
 once  more;  there  were  earthquakes  in  the North 
 and  fire  came  from the  mountains, and  the Orcs 
 raided into Beleriand. But Fingolfin and  Maidros . 
 gathered  their  forces,  and  many  of  the  Dark- 
 elves, and they destroyed all the Orcs that  were . 
 without  Angband,  and  they  fell  upon   an  army 
 that gathered upon Bladorion,  and before  it could 
 retreat to  Morgoth's walls  they destroyed  it ut- 
 terly; and this was the 'Second Battle', Dagor 
 Aglareb,  'the  Glorious  Battle'.   And  afterward 
 they  laid  the  Siege  of  Angband   which  lasted 
 more  than  two'   hundred  years;   and  Fingolfin 
 boasted  that  Morgoth could  never burst  from his 
 leaguer,  though  neither  could  key  take Angband 
 nor  recover  the Silmarils.  But war  never ceased 
 utterly in all this time, for Morgoth  was secretly 
 arming, and ever  and anon  would try  the strength 
 and watchfulness of his foes.(4)                     
   But Turgon being still troubled  in heart  took a 
 third  part  of  the  Gnomes of  Fingolfin's house, 
 and  their  goods,  and  their  womenfolk,  and de- 
 parted   south   and   vanished,   and   none  knew 
 whither  he  was  gone;  but  he  came  to Gondolin 
 and  built  a  city  and fortified  the surrounding 
 hills.                                             
                                                   
   But the rest beleaguered Angband in  this wise. 
 In the West,  were Fingolfin  and Fingon,  and they 
 dwelt  in  Hithlum,  and  their  chief fort  was at 
 'Sirion's Well'  (Eithel Sirion),  on the  east of 
 Eredwethion,  and  all  Eredwethion   they  manned, 
 and   watched  Bladorion   thence  and   rode  often 
 upon that plain, even  to the  feet of  the mountains 
 of Morgoth; and their horses multiplied for the 

 

        
                                                  
 grass  was  good.  Of  those  horses many  of the 
 sires came from Valinor. But  the sons  of Finrod 
 held  the  land from  Eredwethion to  the eastern 
 end of Taur-na-Danion the  Forest of  Pines, from 
 whose   northern   slopes   also   they   guarded 
 Bladorion.  But  Fingolfin  was  overlord  of the 
 Dark-elves as far south as Eglorest' and  west of 
 Eglor; and he was  King of  Hithlum, and  Lord of 
 the  Falas  or  Western  Shore; and  Felagund was 
 King of Narog,  and his  brothers were  the Lords 
 of Taur-na-Danion, and his vassals;  and Felagund 
 was lord of the lands east and  west of  Narog as 
 far  south  as  Sirion's  mouths,  from  Eglor to 


236 

 Sirion, save for part of Doriath that lay west of 
 Sirion  between  Taiglin  and  Umboth-Muilin. But 
 between  Sirion  and  Mindeb  no  man  dwelt; and 
 in Gondolin,  south-west of  Taur-na-Danion, was 
 Turgon, but that was not known.                   
  And  King   Felagund  had   his  seat   at  Nar- 
 gothrond  far  to  the  South,  but his  fort and 
 strong place was in the North,  in the  pass into 
 Beleriand   between   Eredwethion   and  Taur-na- 
 Danion, and it was upon an isle in the  waters of 
 Sirion that was called Tolsirion. South  of Taur- 
 na-Danion  was  a  wide space  untenanted between 
 the fences of Melian and the regions  of Finrod's 
 sons, who held  most to  the northern  borders of 
 the    wooded   mountains.    Easternmost   dwelt 
 Orodreth,  nighest  to  his  friends the  sons of 
 Feanor. And  of these  Celegorm and  Curufin held 
 the  land between  Aros and  Celon even  from the 
 borders of Doriath to the  Pass of  Aglon between 
 Taur-na-Danion and the Hill of Himling,  and this 
 pass  and  the  plains  beyond they  guarded. But 
 Maidros  had  a  strong  place  upon the  Hill of 
 Himling, and the  lower hills  that lie  from the 
 Forest  even  to   Eredlindon  were   called  the 
 Marches  of  Maidros,  and   he  was   much  in 

 

 the plains to the North, but held also the woods        
 south between Celon and Gelion; and to the East         
 Maglor held the land even as far  as Eredlindon;        
 but Cranthir ranged in the wide lands between           
 Gelion and the Blue Mountains; and all East             
 Beleriand  behind was  wild and  little tenanted        
 save by scattered Dark-elves,  but it  was under        
 the  overlordship   of  Maidros   from  Sirion's        
 mouths to Gelion (where it joins with Brilthor),        
 and Damrod and Diriel were there, and  came not:        
 much to war in the North. But Ossiriand  was not        
 subject to  Maidros or  his brethren,  and there        
 dwelt the Green-elves  between Gelion  and Ascar        
 and Adurant, and the mountains. Into East               
 Beleriand many of the  Elf-lords even  from afar        
 came at times for hunting in the wild woods.            
                                                        
51 - 255 (6) This time is called the Siege of Angband and 
  was  a  time  of bliss,  and the  world had  peace and 
  light,   and   Beleriand   became   exceedingly  fair, 
  and  Men   waxed  and   multiplied  and   spread,  and 
  had  converse  with  the   Dark-elves  of   the  East, 
  and  learned  much  Of  them,   and  they   heard  ru- 
  mours  of  the  Blessed  Realms  of  the  West  and of 
  the  Powers  that  dwelt  there,  and  many  in  their 
  wanderings moved slowly thither.                       
    In   this   time   Brithombar   and   Eglorest  were 
  builded  to  fair  towns  and  the  Tower  of Tindobel 
  was  set  up  upon  the  cape  west  of   Eglorest  to 
  watch   the   Western  Seas;   and  some   went  forth 
  and  dwelt  upon the  great isle  of Balar  that lieth 
  in  the  bay  of  Balar   into  which   Sirion  flows. 
  And   in   the  East   the  Gnomes   clomb  Eredlindon 
  and gazed afar, but came  not into the lands be- 
  yond;   but   in   those   mountains   they   met  the 
  Dwarves,  and   there  was   yet  no   enmity  between 
  them  and  nonetheless  little  love.  For  it  is not 
  known whence the Dwarves came, save that the           

 

                 
                                                         
       are not of Elf-kin or mortal kind or  of Morgoth's 
       breed. But in those regions  the Dwarves  dwelt in 


237 

       great mines and cities in  the East  of Eredlindon 
       and far south of Beleriand, and the chief of these 
       were Nogrod and Belegost.                          
                                                         
  102  About this  time the  building of  Nargothrond and 
       of Gondolin was wellnigh complete.                 
                                                         
  104  About  this  time  Cranthir's  folk first  met the 
       Dwarves  as  is  told above;  for the  Dwarves had 
       of old a  road into  the West  that came  up along 
       Eredlindon  to  the  East  and passed  westward in 
       the  passes  south  of  Mount  Dolm  and  down the 
       course of [the] R[iver] Ascar  and over  Gelion at 
       the ford Sarn Athrad and so to Aros.(7)             
                                                         
  105  Morgoth  endeavoured  to  take  Fingolfin  at  un- 
       awares  and  an  army,  but  a small  one, marched 
       south,  west  of  Eredlomin,  but  were  destroyed 
       and  passed not  into Hithlum,  but the  most were 
       driven into the sea in the firth at  Drengist; and 
       this  is  not  reckoned  among the  great battles, 
       though the slaughter of Orcs was great.            
        After  this  was  peace a  long while,  save that 
       Glomund  the  first  of  Dragons  came  forth from 
       Angband's  gate  at night  in 155  and he  was yet 
       young.  And  the  Elves  fled  to  Eredwethion and 
       Taur-na-Danion,   but   Fingon  with   his  horsed 
       archers  rode  up  and   Glomund  could   not  yet 
       withstand their darts, and fled back and  came not 
       forth again for a long time.                       
                                                         
  170  Here Beor was born east of Eredlindon.             
                                                         
  188  Here Haleth was born east of Eredlindon.           

 

  190 Here Hador the Goldenhaired was born east of                          
          Eredlindon.                                                       
                                                                           
  200 Meeting of Felagund and Beor. Bregolas born.                          
                                                                           
  202 War on east marches. Beor and Felagund there.                         
          Barahir born.                                                     
                                                                           
  220  Unfriendliness of  sons of  Feanor to  Men -                 
          because of lies  of Morgoth:  - hence  tragedy of                 
          their treaty in end of need to the worst Men, and                 
          their betrayal by them.(8)                                        
                                                                           
                                 NOTES.                                     
                                                                           
1 Added  in pencil;  At this  time Men first awoke  in the  midst [emended 
 to east] of  the world.  In the  meantime (Fingolfin,  &c.) In  the second 
 sentence led was changed to had led.                                       
2 Eglorest is an early change in ink from Eglarest; cf. AB I, notes 8, 67, 
3 two was changed from one while these  Annals were  in process  of com- 
 position; see note 6.                                                      
4  This  sentence  was  an early  addition, probably  made when  my father 
 was writing the annal for 105.                                             
5 Eglorest < Eglarest, as in note  2. At  the occurrences  of the  name in 
 the annal 51 - 255 it was written Eglorest.                               
6 255 is a change in pencil from 155.  hut it  obviously belongs  with the 
 change  given in  note 3,  made while  the Annals  were being  written, as 
 can be seen  from the  reference in  annal 105  to Glomund's  emergence in 
 155, which took place  during the  Siege. My  father must  have overlooked 
 the need to change the date, and put it in later when he noticed it.       
7 Added in pencil: But they came not  into Beleriand  after the  coming of 
 the  Gnomes,  until  the power  of Maidros  and Fingon  fell in  the Third 
 (Fourth) Battle.                                                           
8 At the end the text was  written at  increasing speed  and the  last few 


238 

 lines are a scrawl. The unfilled annal 220 was to be  the entry  of Haleth 
 and Hador into Beleriand. In the final  sentence 'tragedy'  replaced 'jus- 
 tice' at the time of writing.                                              
                                                                           
            Commentary on the Annals of Beleriand (text AB II).            
                                                                           
 The revised dates. The period of the Siege of Angband is ex-               
 tended by a hundred years, and now lasts from  51 (as  in AB               

 

     
                                                                   
 I)to 255 (notes 3 and 6). The birth dates of Beor, Haleth, 
 Hador, Bregolas, and Barahir, and the meeting of Felagund 
 with Beor, are all increased pari passu with the lengthening of 
 the Siege by a hundred years from AB I. 
                                                                   
 This  commentary   again  follows   the  annal-sections   of  the 
 text. The  many cases  where names  pencilled on  the AB  I man- 
 uscript  are  embodied  in  the  text of  AB II  can be  noticed to- 
 gether;   Dagor-os-Giliath,   Eredwethion,    Belegar,   Eredlindon, 
 Eglorest  (<  Eglarest),  Eithel  Sirion,  Sarn Athrad   (for  Sarn 
 Athra).  Menegroth  in  annal  50  occurs  in  an  addition  to  AV 
 (note 18) and in the Old English version II (p. 343),              
                                                                   
 Opening section and Annals 1 to 51 As I have said, while      
 AB II is here closely based on AB I, there are some minor de- 
 velopments. Where in AB I Thangorodrim is called 'the Black 
 Mountain', it is now the highest peak of 'the Black Moun-      
 tains', Whether the story of the Battle-under-Stars had yet      
 shifted is not clear; the statement that the sons of Feanor en- 
 camped about Lake Mithrim after the capture of Maidros be- 
 longs to the older story (see p. 352), whereas Feanor's death 
 'in Mithrim' (which shows that Mithrim was a region and not 
 only the name of the lake) suggests the later. Fingolfin's defi- 
 ance  before  Angband  is  now  present,  and  the removal  of the 
 Feanorians  to  the southern  shores of  the lake  when Fingolfin's 
 people arrived, as they are in AV (p. 320).                        
 In  annal  20  the  Elvish  name  Mereth  Aderthad  for  the Feast 
 of Reuniting now appears  for the  first time;  and a  little more 
 is said of Thingol's policies at this time  (a passage  that reap- 
 pears in The Silmarillion, p. 111), though nothing of  his hostil- 
 ity to the Gnomes.                                                 
 In  AB  I  Turgon's  departure  to  Gondolin  is  given  under the 
 year 50, but in AB II it was in  this year  that he  discovered it 
 ('by  the  grace  of  Ulmo'), and  in 51  he departed  from Hithlum 
 (with  a  third  of the  Gnomes of  the second  house: so  also in 
 Be Silmarillion, p. 126). Under 102 it is  stated that  the build- 
 ing  of  Gondolin  was  'wellnigh  complete', and  this (relative) 
 dating  survived into  The Silmarillion  (p. 125),  where Gondolin 

 

  was  'full-wrought  after  two  and fifty  years of  secret toil' 
  though in the final story it  was only  then that  Turgon himself 
  abandoned his halls of Vinyamar.                                  
                                                                   
  Annal 51 The Glorious Battle, of which there is only a sug-       
  gestion in AB I (under the years 50 - 51), now becomes a de-      
  terminate event with a name (and the Elvish Dagor Aglareb       
  appears), and the driving back of the Orcs becomes the de         
  struction of an Orc-host on Baldorion; cf. The Silmarillion       
  p. 115. Fingolfin's boast that Morgoth could never break the      
  Siege goes back to Q $9: 'The Gnomes boasted that never           
  could he break their leaguer.'                                    
    In AB II the passage concerning the disposition of the          
  Gnomish princes during the years of the Siege is greatly ex- 
  panded, with much new detail (later appearing in The              
  Silmarillion in chapter 14, Of Beleriand and its Realms). It was 
  clearly composed very rapidly.                                    
    We now hear of the horses of the Lords of Hithlum that pas- 
  tured on Bladorion, many of whose sires came from Valinor         


239 

  (cf. The Silmarillion p. 119). In AB I Fingolfin was overlord 
  of 'the Dark-elves west of Narog' (which no doubt implies the 
  relatively small importance of Nargothrond before the Battle of  
  Sudden Flame), but here his authority is over the Dark-elves      
  west of the river Eglor (Eldor on the Westward extension of       
  the first map, p. 281; see insert), and he is 'Lord of the Falas' 
  (cf. Falasse on the Ambarkanta map IV, p. 303; see insert);       
  while Felagund is lord of the whole territory between Eglor       
  and Sirion except for Doriath-beyond-Sirion. In The               
  Silmarillion (p. 120) Felagund (there called Finrod) likewise 
  'became the overlord of all the Elves of Beleriand between'       
  Sirion and the sea, save only in the Falas', but the Falas were 
  ruled by Cirdan the Shipwright, of whom there is still no trace. 
  Felagund's brothers have now become his vassals, as they are      
  in The Silmarillion (p. 120).                                     
    Between Sirion and Mindeb (see pp. 273-4) is a land where      
  'no man dwelt', but it is not named; in The Silmarillion (p.      
  121) it is 'the empty land of Dimbar'. 'A wide space unten-       
  anted' lay between the Girdle of Melian in the North and Taur- 
  na-Danion, but Nan Dungorthin (see pp. 273 - 4) is not named. 

 

              
                                                                    
 Orodreth's  land is  now specifically  in the  east of  the great 
 pine-forested  highlands,  where  he  is  near to  his friends 
 Celegorm  and   Curufin,  whose   territory  between   Aros  and 
 Celon (afterwards  called  Himlad)  and  extending up  through the 
 Pass of  Aglon  is  now  made  definite,  and as  it was  to remain. 
 The  territories  of  the  other  sons  of  Feanor  are  also given 
 clearer  bounds,  with  mention  for  the first  time of  the Marches 
 of  Maidros,  of  Maglor's  land  in  the  East  'even  as  far  as 
 Eredlindon'  (afterwards  'Maglor's Gap'),  of Cranthir's  (not yet 
 called  Thargelion)  between  Gelion  and   the  mountains,   and  of 
 the territory  of  Damrod  and   Diriel  in   the  South   of  East 
 Beleriand.  I  do  not know  why Maidros'  overlordship is  said to 
 extend  from  Sirion's  mouths  to Gelion  'where it  joins with 
 Brilthor'. At this time Brilthor was  the fifth  (not as  later the 
 fourth) of   the  tributaries   of  Gelion   coming  down   from  the 
 mountains, the sixth and  most southerly  being Adurant  (p. 283; 
 see also insert).                                                 
                                                                    
 Annal 51-255   With the opening paragraph of this annal cf.                
 Q $6:                                                              
                                                                    
 The  Dark-elves  they  met  and  were  aided  by  them,  and  were 
 taught  by  them  speech  and  many  things  beside,   and  became 
 the  friends  of  the  children  of  the  Eldalie  who  had  never 
 found  the  paths  to  Valinor,  and knew  of the  Valar but  as a 
 rumour and a distant name.                                          
                                                                    
 The  reference  to  the  building  of  Brithombar and  Eglorest 'to 
 fair towns' is found in The Silmarillion (p. 120), but there with 
 the  addition  of the  word 'anew',  this is  because in  the later 
 narrative  the  Havens  of the  Falas had  long existed  under the 
 lordship of  Cirdan, and  were rebuilt  with the  aid and  skill of 
 the  Noldor  of  Felagund's following.  In the  same passage  it is 
 said  that Felagund  'raised the  tower of  Barad Nimras  to watch 
 the western  sea',  and  also that  some of  the Elves  of Nargoth- 
 rond 'went  forth  and explored  the great  Isle of  Balar', though 
 'it was not  their  fate that  they should  ever dwell  there', The 
 present  annal  is  the  first occurrence  of the  Isle and  Bay of 

 

  Balar.  The  Tower  of  Tindobel,  forerunner  of Barad  Nimras, is 
  marked on the Westward extension of the first map (see insert).      
    The   climbing   of   Eredlindon   by   the   Gnomes   and  their 
  meeting with  the Dwarves  is in  The Silmarillion  (pp. 112  - 13) 
  ascribed specifically to Caranthir's people settled in              
  Thargelion.  The  Dwarf-cities  are  in  AB  II  still  placed  'far 
  south  of  Beleriand',  as  on  the Eastward  extension of  the map 


240 

  (p.  285;  see  insert).  The  view of  the Gnomes'  relations with 
  the   Dwarves,  and   of  the   Dwarves  themselves,   though  very 
  briefly  expressed,  is  much  as  in the  passage of  Q $9  on the 
  subject  -  as  emended  (note  4)  from  'There  they   made  war 
  upon  the  Dwarves  of  Nogrod  and  Belegost'  to 'There  they had 
  converse with' them: there is no suggestion here  that there  was . 
  fighting  between  the  peoples,  though there  is also  no mention 
  of  traffic  between  them, which  is much  emphasized in  the pas- 
  sage that 'structurally' corresponds in The Silmarillion            
                                                                     
  (p 113).                                                            
                                                                     
  Annal  104  In  AB  I it  is not  until annal  163 that  the Elves' 
  first  encounter  with  the  Dwarves  is  mentioned;  this  passage 
  was  bracketed  (note  29),  obviously  because  the matter  was to 
  be introduced earlier.                                              
    The  description of  the Dwarf-road  agrees precisely  with the 
  later  course  of the  road on  the Eastward  extension of  the map 
  (see  p.  285  and  insert).  Mount  Dolm, which  is marked  on the 
  map, is here first named in the narrative texts. It is notable that 
  the  Dwarves are  here said  to have  had this  road 'of  old'; and 
  the pencilled interpolation given  in note  7 certainly  means that 
  they  no  longer  came  into  Beleriand  after  the  return  of the 
  Noldoli. In Q $14 is it  recorded that  'Dwarves first  spread west 
  from Eryd-luin, the Blue Mountains, into Beleriand after the        
  Battle of Unnumbered Tears'. In The Silmarillion (p. 91)            
  Dwarves  entered  Beleriand  and  its  history  very  long  before: 'It 
  came  to  pass  during  the  second  age of  the captivity  of Melkor 
  that Dwarves came over the Blue Mountains of Ered Luin into         
  Beleriand',   and   it   was  Dwarves   of  Belegost   who  devised the 
  mansions   of    Thingol.   the    Thousand   Caves.    'And   when the 
  building   of  Menegroth   was  achieved...   the  Naugrim   yet  came 
  ever and anon over the mountains and went in traffic about the      

 

               
                                                                    
 lands.' Annal 104 in  AB II  must be  the first  sign of  this im- 
 portant structural change in the history; and it is  probably sig- 
 nificant  that  the  reference  is  to the  first encounter  of the 
 Gnomes   (not   of   Elves   in   general)   with    the   Dwarves. 
 The next  version  of  the  Annals  of  Beleriand  makes  it  clear 
 that the reference  in the  interpolated passage  (note 7)  to 'the 
 Third (Fourth)  Battle'  is to  the Battle  of Sudden  Flame, despite 
 the naming  of Fingon  rather than  Fingolfin. In  AB II  the first 
 battle is  Dagor-os-Giliath,  the  second  Dagor  Aglareb,  and  the 
 third (though  AB  II  did  not  reach  it)  the  Battle   of  Sudden 
 Flame.  This  interpolation  shows my  father already  thinking of 
 what became  the  First  Battle  of  Beleriand, in  which Denethor 
 of the Green-elves was slain,  and which  is first  hinted at  in a 
 pencilled addition to  AV (note  18); after  the inclusion  of this 
 battle in  the  great  Battles  of Beleriand,  that of  Sudden Flame 
 became the fourth.                                                
                                                                    
 Annal  105  In  this  annal  are  described  for  the  first  time 
 Morgoth's tests of the  strength and  watchfulness of  the besieg- 
 ers,  referred  to   in  annal   51,  and   which  remain   in  The 
 Silmarillion  (p.  116).  The  first  of  these  is  there said  to have 
 taken  place nearly  a hundred  years since  Dagor Aglareb.  not as 
 here  fifty-four:  but  the route  taken by  Morgoth's host  is the 
 same  in  both  accounts,  southwards   down  the   coast  between 
 Ered  Lomin and  the sea  to the  Firth of  Drengist. The  story of 
 the emergence  of  Glomund,  not  yet  full-grown,  from  the gates 
 of  Angband  by  night,  the  flight  of  the Elves  to Eredwethion 
 and  Taur-na-Danion,  and   the  rout   of  Glomund   by  Fingon's 
 horsed archers, is very close to the  account in  The Silmarillion, 
 where  however  it  took  place  a hundred  years after  the attack 
 that ended at Drengist: in  AB II,  again, the  time was  only half 
 as long.  These  differences  are  associated  with  further  great 
 lengthening of the duration of the Siege.                              


241 

  The  addition  'in  full  might'  (of  Glomund  at  the  Battle of 
 Sudden  Flame)  made  to  AB  I  (note  18)  clearly  depends  on this 
 stage   in   the   backward    movement   of    Glomund's   entries 
 into the  history:  see  p.  380.  Some  lines  of Old  English verse 
 accompanying  the  lists  of  Old English  names refer  to Fingon's 
 victory over the Dragon:                                                

 

      Pa com of Mistoran meare ridan                             
      Finbrand felahror flanas sceotan;                           
      Glomundes gryre grimmum straelum                             
      for( afliemde.                                              
                                                                 
 Finbrand is given as AElfwine's rendering of Fingon (p. 261); 
 Mistora is Mithrim (p. 258).                                     
                                                                 
  The concluding, hastily scrawled, sentence of AB II is inter- 
 esting. In The Silmarillion the Haladin (the 'People of Haleth') 
 dwelt in the south of Thargelion after crossing the Blue Moun- 
 tains, and there 'the people of Caranthir paid little heed to    
 them' (p. 143); after their brave defence of their homes         
 Caranthir 'looked kindly upon Men', and 'seeing, over late,      
 what valour there was in the Edain' offered them free lands to   
 dwell in further North under the protection of the Eldar: an of- 
 fer which was refused. This is the only reference in The         
 Silmarillion to 'unfriendliness' on the part of the Feanorians   
 towards Men (though one could well imagine it); but it is note- 
 worthy, in respect of the last words of these Annals, that it was 
 to Cranthir (Caranthir) that the treacherous sons of Ulfang      
 were allied (AB I annal 163, The Silmarillion p. 157).           
                                                                 
                             APPENDIX.                            
                                                                 
          Old English version of the Annals of Beleriand          
                    made by AElfwine or Eriol.                    
                                                                 
 This is the only further fragment of AElfwine's work in Tol      
 Eressea in his own language. Its relation to the Modem En-       
 glish version is puzzling, since, though it largely corresponds 
 closely to AB II, it also has features of the AB I text. For in- 
 stance, the defiance of Fingolfin before Angband and the with-   
 drawal of the Feanorians to the southern shore of the lake is    
 absent from annal I; the date 'I - C' follows AB I; while Mereth 
 Aderthad in annal XX agrees with AB II the annal is otherwise    
 as AB I; and annal L is a confused mixture. The simple expla-    
 nation that my father made the Old English version after AB I    

 

  but before AB II (and hence the headnote to AB II 'Translation 
  of AElfwine') comes up against the difficulty  that in  the Old 
  English  the  Siege  of Angband  lasted tu  hund geara  odde ma 
  (line 81),  whereas  AB II  has 'one  hundred' emended  to 'two 
  hundred'.   But    the   matter    is   not    of   importance. 
   Like version II of the Old English Annals of Valinor,  the text 
  breaks  off in  mid-sentence. My  father composed  these annals, 
  like the others, fluently and rapidly  (hence such  variations as 
  Maegdros,  Maegedros,  Maidros); but  he was  interrupted, no 
  doubt, and never took them up again. I suspect that AElfwine's 
  version of the Annals of Beleriand was the last,                
                                                                 
                      Beleriandes Geargesaegen.                    
                                                                 
         Fore     sunnan    upgange:     Morgop   gefleah       
         Godedel   paet   is   Falinor,   ond    genom   pa       
         eorclanstanas  Feanores,  and  pa  com he  eft on       
         Norpdaelas   ond   getimbrode   paer on   niwan  his       
         faesten  Angband  (paet  is  Irenhell)   under  pam   5 
         Sweartbeorgum.   He   of  searucrafte   gescop  pa       
         Balrogas  ond  pa  orcas;  ond   pa  eorclanstanas       
         sette  he  on  his  isernan  helme.  Pa  comon  pa       
         Noldielfe  paere  yldestan  maegpe,  pe  Ierfeloran       


242 

         hatton,  ond  sohton  to  lande,  and  gelaedde hie  10 
         Feanor  and  his  seofon  suna.   Paer forbaerndon       
         hie   pa  Teleriscan   scipu;  and   hie  gefuhton       
         sippan  wip  Morgopes  here  and  gefliemde  hine:       
         paet waes  paet aereste   gefeoht,  and   hatte  on       
         noldisce  Dagor-os-Giliad,   paet is   on  Englisc    15 
         gefeoht  under   steorrum  oppe   Tungolgup.  Paer       
         Feanor   geweold    waelstowe   ond    adraefde   pa       
         orcas,   ac   weard  self  forwundod   pearle  of       
         Gopmoge    Balroga   heretoga,    Morgogs   pegne,       
         and   swealt   sippan   on   Miprime.   Pa   weard    20 
         Maegdros   his    yldesta    sunu    of    Morgope       
         beswicen,   and   weard   gefangen,   and  Morgop       
         het    hine    ahon    be   paere   rihthande   on       
         Pangorodrim.   Pa    gedydon   pa    opere   suna       

 

 Feaanores ymb Mithrim pone mere on                25 
 Northwestweardum landum, behindan Scuge-             
 beorge (Eredwepion).                                
                                                     
 AEfter sunnan upgange.                                
                                                     
 Sunnan  gear  I  Her  aetiewdon  on  aerest  se      
 mona  7  seo  sunne,  and  pa  Godu  scopon hie      
 aefter  pam  pe Morgop  fordyde pa  Beamas, for   30 
 pon  pe  hie  naefdon  leoht. Swa  com gementen      
 Tid  on  middangeard.  Fingolfin   gelaedde  pa      
 opere   maegpe  para  Noldielfa   on  Norpdaelas      
 ofer   Isgegrind    oppe  Helcarakse    on   pa      
 Hinderland;  ond  pa  for  Felagund   mid  sume   35 
 paere  priddan  maegpe.  Pa  foron   hie  ealle      
 norpan  mid  pam  pe  seo  sunne  aras,  and pa      
 onbrugdon   hie   hira   gupfanan,   and  comon      
 sippan  mid  micle   prymme  on   Miprim.  Paer      
 waes pa   giet  him  faehp betwux paere  maegpe   40   
 Feanores  ond  pam  oprum.  Morgoth  mid  py pe      
 leoht aetiewde beah on his deopestan gedelf, ac      
 sippan  smipode  paer  fela pinga  dearnunga and      
 sende forp sweartne smic.                            
                                                     
II. Her Fingon  Fingolfines sunu  sibbe geniwode   45 
 betwux  pam  maegpum  for  pam  pe   he  ahredde      
 Maegedros.                                           
                                                     
I-C.  Her   geondferdon   and   gesceawoden  pa      
 Noldelfe Beleriand  and gesaeton hit missenlice      
 ond  eal  Sirigeones   dene  of   Garsecge  (pe   50 
 Noldelfe   Belegar   hatad)   op   Haewengebeorg      
 (paet  sind   Eredlindon),  butan   Doriade  on      
 middan   pam   lande   pe  Pingol   and  Melian      
 ahton.                                               
                                                     
XX. Her  weard se  gebeorscipe and  se freolsdaeg  55    
 and   se  plega   pe  Noldelfe   Merep Aderpad      

 

 nemnad (paet  is  Sibbegemotes   freols)  on       
 Wiligwangas    gehealden,   pe    Noldielfe       
 Nantaprin  hatad,  neah  Sirigeones  mupum, and       
 paer  wurdon  gesamnode ge  elfe of  Godedle ge   60 
 deorcelfe   ge   eac  sume   a  elfe   of  pam       
 Westhypum   and   of   Doriade    of   Pingole       
 gesende. Pa weard long sibbtid.                      
                                                     
 Her  wearp  eft unfridu  aweht of  Morgope, ond       
 wurdon  micle  eorpdynas  on  Nordaelum,  ond     65 
 pa  orcas  hergodon  floccmaelum  on  Beleriand       
 ond pe elfe hie fuhton wid.                           
                                                     
 Her  wurdon Turgon  Fingolfines sunu  7 Inglor       


243 

 Felagund  Finrodes  sunu  his  freond   7  maeg       
 yfelum  swefnum  geswenct.  7  hie   faesten 7    70 
 fripstowa   gesohton  aer   pon   pe   Morgop       
 aetburste  swa  hira  swefn  him   manodon.  Pa       
 funde  Felagund  pa  deopan  scrafu  be Naroge       
 streame, 7 he paer ongann burg gestadelian and       
 waepenhord   samnian,  aefter  paere  wisan  pe   75 
 Pingol   bude   Menegrop,   7  he   paet heald       
 Nargoprond  nemnde.  Ac  Turgon  ana  ferde 7       
 be  Ulmoes  lare  funde  Gondoelin  pa dieglan       
 dene, ne saegde nanum menn pa giet.                   
                                                     
 Her ongann  Morgop eft  his maegen  styrian; 7    80 
 wearp  oft   unfridu  aweht   on  Beleriandes       
 gemaerum.    Micle    eorddynas    wurdon    on       
 norddaelum,  7  pa  orcas  hergodon  floccmaelum       
 on Beleriand, ac pa elfe fuhton hie wid 7 hie       
 gefliemdon.                                       85 
                                                     
LI. Her gegaderode Morgod medmicelne here, and       
 fyr  abaerst  of  pam  nordernum   beorgum;  ac       
 Fingolfin 7  Maidros  fierda   gesamnodon  and       
 manige  para  deorcelfa  mid,  7  hie fordydon       
 pone orchere to nahte, and aslogon ealle pe hie   90 

 

            utan Angbande gemetton, and hie ehton paes                            
            heriges geond pone feld Baldorion, paet nan eft                       
            to Angbandes durum comon. Pis gefeoht hatte                          
            siddan Dagor Aglareb, aet is Hrepgup on                                
            Englisc. Sippan gesetton hie 'Angbandes          95            95      
            Ymbsetl', and paet gelaeston hie tu hund geara                         
            odde ma, 7 Fingolfin beotode paet Morgop                              
            naefre from pam ymbhagan aetberstan mihte.                             
            He ne mihte self swapeah Angband abrecan ne                          
            pa Silmarillan ahreddan. Unfridu weard naefre    100            100      
            ealunga aswefed on pisse langan tide, for                        
            paem pe Morgop d... lice hine gewaepnode 7                           
            aefre ymbe stunde wolde fandian paere strengu                          
            and paere waecene his gefana.                                          
               Turgon cyning swapeah                                      105 
                                                                                
                                        NOTES.                                   
                                                                                
   1 - 20    Another, earlier, Old English account of these events is found at 
             the end of version I of the Annals of Valinor. p. 336.              
                                                                                
        3    eorclanstanas: see p. 283. As in the Old English version I of AV 
             the name Silmaril is also treated  as an  Old English  noun, with 
             plura1 Silmarillan (line 84) (in the AV version Silmarillas).      
                                                                                
        9    Ierfeloran: with variant vowels Erfeloran, Yrfeloran in  the Old 
             English version II of AV (line 135), and in the list of Old English 
             names, p. 212,                                                      
                                                                                
       16  Tungolgup occurs also in the Old English version I of AV, line 55. 
                                                                                 
       37  sunne: sunnan MS.                                                      
                                                                                
       58  Wiligwangas is a pencilled correction from Wiligleagas.                
                                                                                
       61  pam: pa MS.                                                            
                                                                                
    64-85    The text of this annal is confused. The first paragraph follows the 
             beginning of the first  entry numbered  50 in  AB I:  the second 
             paragraph corresponds closely to AB II annal 50: and the third re- 
             peats the first.                                                    

 

        
                                                                    


244 

 78  Gondoelin is clearly written thus,                               
                                                                    
 102 The illegible word is not dirnlice 'secretly'                   
                                                                    
        New Old English names in this text are;                      
                                                                    
    Sweartbeorgas  (line  6) 'Black  Mountains' (O.E.  sweart 'black, 
    dark');                                                          
  Scugebeorg (lines 26 - 7) = Eredwethion (O.E. scua 'shadow');      
  Isgegrind (line 34) = Helcarakse (O.E. gegrind 'grinding together, 
    clashing');                                                     
  Haewengebeorg (line 51) = Eredlindon (O.E. haewen 'blue');           
  Wiligwangas (line 58) =  Nan Tathrin  (O.E. wilig  'willow', wang 
    'meadow. flat place'  (cf. Wetwang  in The  Lord of  the Rings); 
    the  rejected  name  Wiligleagas  contains leah,  Modern English 
    lea).                                                            
  Westhypum (line 62, dative plural) = Western Havens  (cf. Eifethyd 
    = Swanhaven, p. 337; Modern English hithe).                      
  Hrepgup (line 94) = Dagor Aglareb (O.E. hrep 'glory').             
                                                                    
 The  most  notable  name  here  is   Inglor  Felagund   (line  68). 
 This is the first occurrence of Inglor,  which remained  his 'true' 
 name  for  many  years, though  its existence  is indicated  by the 
 Old English equivalent Inglaf Felahror (p. 261).                    

 

 

 

 